emma by jane austen volume ichapter iemma woodhouse handsome clever and rich with a comfortable homeand happy disposition seemed to unite some of the best blessingsof existence and had lived nearly twentyone years in the worldwith very little to distress or vex her.she was the youngest of the two daughters of a most affectionateindulgent father and had in consequence of her sisters marriagebeen mistress of his house from a very early period.
her motherhad died too long ago for her to have more than an indistinctremembrance of her caresses and her place had been suppliedby an excellent woman as governess who had fallen little shortof a mother in affection.sixteen years had miss taylor been in mr. woodhouses familyless as a governess than a friend very fond of both daughtersbut particularly of emma.
between them it was more the intimacyof sisters.
even before miss taylor had ceased to hold the nominaloffice of governess the mildness of her temper had hardly allowedher to impose any restraint and the shadow of authority beingnow long passed away they had been living together as friend andfriend very mutually attached and emma doing just what she likedhighly esteeming miss taylors judgment but directed chiefly byher own.the real evils indeed of emmas situation were the power of havingrather too much her own way and a disposition to think a littletoo well of herself these were the disadvantages which threatenedalloy to her many enjoyments.
the danger however was at presentso unperceived that they did not by any means rank as misfortuneswith her.sorrow camea gentle sorrowbut not at all in the shape of anydisagreeable consciousness.miss taylor married.
it was misstaylors loss which first brought grief.
it was on the weddingdayof this beloved friend that emma first sat in mournful thoughtof any continuance.
the wedding over and the bridepeople goneher father and herself were left to dine together with no prospectof a third to cheer a long evening.
her father composed himselfto sleep after dinner as usual and she had then only to sitand think of what she had lost.the event had every promise of happiness for her friend.
mr. westonwas a man of unexceptionable character easy fortune suitable ageand pleasant manners and there was some satisfaction in consideringwith what selfdenying generous friendship she had always wishedand promoted the match but it was a black mornings work for her.the want of miss taylor would be felt every hour of every day.she recalled her past kindnessthe kindness the affection of sixteenyearshow she had taught and how she had played with her from fiveyears oldhow she had devoted all her powers to attach and amuseher in healthand how nursed her through the various illnessesof childhood.
a large debt of gratitude was owing here but theintercourse of the last seven years the equal footing and perfectunreserve which had soon followed isabellas marriage on theirbeing left to each other was yet a dearer tenderer recollection.she had been a friend and companion such as few possessed intelligentwellinformed useful gentle knowing all the ways of the familyinterested in all its concerns and peculiarly interested in herselfin every pleasure every scheme of hersone to whom she could speakevery thought as it arose and who had such an affection for heras could never find fault.how was she to bear the changeit was true that her friend wasgoing only half a mile from them but emma was aware that great mustbe the difference between a mrs. weston only half a mile from themand a miss taylor in the house and with all her advantagesnatural and domestic she was now in great danger of sufferingfrom intellectual solitude.
she dearly loved her father but hewas no companion for her.
he could not meet her in conversationrational or playful.the evil of the actual disparity in their ages and mr. woodhouse hadnot married early was much increased by his constitution and habitsfor having been a valetudinarian all his life without activityof mind or body he was a much older man in ways than in yearsand though everywhere beloved for the friendliness of his heartand his amiable temper his talents could not have recommended himat any time.her sister though comparatively but little removed by matrimonybeing settled in london only sixteen miles off was much beyondher daily reach and many a long october and november evening mustbe struggled through at hartfield before christmas brought the nextvisit from isabella and her husband and their little childrento fill the house and give her pleasant society again.highbury the large and populous village almost amounting to a townto which hartfield in spite of its separate lawn and shrubberiesand name did really belong afforded her no equals.
the woodhouseswere first in consequence there.
all looked up to them.
she hadmany acquaintance in the place for her father was universally civilbut not one among them who could be accepted in lieu of misstaylor for even half a day.
it was a melancholy change and emmacould not but sigh over it and wish for impossible thingstill her father awoke and made it necessary to be cheerful.his spirits required support.
he was a nervous man easily depressedfond of every body that he was used to and hating to part with themhating change of every kind.
matrimony as the origin of changewas always disagreeable and he was by no means yet reconciledto his own daughters marrying nor could ever speak of her butwith compassion though it had been entirely a match of affectionwhen he was now obliged to part with miss taylor too and fromhis habits of gentle selfishness and of being never able tosuppose that other people could feel differently from himselfhe was very much disposed to think miss taylor had done as sada thing for herself as for them and would have been a great dealhappier if she had spent all the rest of her life at hartfield.emma smiled and chatted as cheerfully as she could to keep himfrom such thoughts but when tea came it was impossible for himnot to say exactly as he had said at dinnerpoor miss taylori wish she were here again.
what a pity itis that mr. weston ever thought of heri cannot agree with you papa you know i cannot.
mr. weston is sucha goodhumoured pleasant excellent man that he thoroughly deservesa good wifeand you would not have had miss taylor live with usfor ever and bear all my odd humours when she might have a house of her owna house of her ownbut where is the advantage of a house of her ownthis is three times as large.and you have never any odd humoursmy dear.how often we shall be going to see them and they coming to seeuswe shall be always meeting we must begin we must go and paywedding visit very soon.my dear how am i to get so far randalls is such a distance.i could not walk half so far.no papa nobody thought of your walking.
we must go in the carriageto be sure.the carriage but james will not like to put the horses to forsuch a little wayand where are the poor horses to be while weare paying our visitthey are to be put into mr. westons stable papa.
you know wehave settled all that already.
we talked it all over with mr. westonlast night.
and as for james you may be very sure he will always likegoing to randalls because of his daughters being housemaid there.i only doubt whether he will ever take us anywhere else.
that wasyour doing papa.
you got hannah that good place.
nobody thoughtof hannah till you mentioned herjames is so obliged to youi am very glad i did think of her.
it was very lucky for i wouldnot have had poor james think himself slighted upon any accountand i am sure she will make a very good servant she is a civilprettyspoken girl i have a great opinion of her.
whenever i see hershe always curtseys and asks me how i do in a very pretty mannerand when you have had her here to do needlework i observe shealways turns the lock of the door the right way and never bangs it.i am sure she will be an excellent servant and it will be a greatcomfort to poor miss taylor to have somebody about her that she isused to see.
whenever james goes over to see his daughter you knowshe will be hearing of us.
he will be able to tell her how weall are.emma spared no exertions to maintain this happier flow of ideasand hoped by the help of backgammon to get her father tolerablythrough the evening and be attacked by no regrets but her own.the backgammontable was placed but a visitor immediately afterwardswalked in and made it unnecessary.mr.
knightley a sensible man about seven or eightandthirty was notonly a very old and intimate friend of the family but particularlyconnected with it as the elder brother of isabellas husband.he lived about a mile from highbury was a frequent visitorand always welcome and at this time more welcome than usualas coming directly from their mutual connexions in london.
he hadreturned to a late dinner after some days absence and now walkedup to hartfield to say that all were well in brunswick square.it was a happy circumstance and animated mr. woodhouse for some time.mr.
knightley had a cheerful manner which always did him goodand his many inquiries after poor isabella and her children wereanswered most satisfactorily.
when this was over mr. woodhousegratefully observed it is very kind of you mr. knightley to comeout at this late hour to call upon us.
i am afraid you must havehad a shocking walk.not at all sir.
it is a beautiful moonlight night and so mildthat i must draw back from your great fire.but you must have found it very damp and dirty.
i wish you maynot catch cold.dirty sir look at my shoes.
not a speck on them.well that is quite surprising for we have had a vast dealof rain here.
it rained dreadfully hard for half an hourwhile we were at breakfast.
i wanted them to put off the wedding.by the byei have not wished you joy.
being pretty well awareof what sort of joy you must both be feeling i have been in no hurrywith my congratulations but i hope it all went off tolerably well.how did you all behave who cried mostah poor miss taylor tis a sad business.poor mr. and miss woodhouse if you please but i cannot possiblysay poor miss taylor.
i have a great regard for you and emmabut when it comes to the question of dependence or independenceatany rate it must be better to have only one to please than two.especially when one of those two is such a fanciful troublesome creaturesaid emma playfully.
that is what you have in your headi knowand what you would certainly say if my father were not by.i believe it is very true my dear indeed said mr. woodhousewith a sigh.
i am afraid i am sometimes very fanciful and troublesome.my dearest papa you do not think i could mean you or supposemr.
knightley to mean you.
what a horrible idea oh no i meantonly myself.
mr. knightley loves to find fault with me you knowin a jokeit is all a joke.
we always say what we like to one another.mr.
knightley in fact was one of the few people who could seefaults in emma woodhouse and the only one who ever told her of themand though this was not particularly agreeable to emma herselfshe knew it would be so much less so to her father that she wouldnot have him really suspect such a circumstance as her not beingthought perfect by every body.emma knows i never flatter her said mr. knightley but imeant no reflection on any body.
miss taylor has been usedto have two persons to please she will now have but one.the chances are that she must be a gainer.well said emma willing to let it passyou want to hearabout the wedding and i shall be happy to tell you for we allbehaved charmingly.
every body was punctual every body in theirbest looks not a tear and hardly a long face to be seen.
oh nowe all felt that we were going to be only half a mile apartand were sure of meeting every day.dear emma bears every thing so well said her father.but mr. knightley she is really very sorry to lose poor miss taylorand i am sure she will miss her more than she thinks for.emma turned away her head divided between tears and smiles.it is impossible that emma should not miss such a companionsaid mr. knightley.
we should not like her so well as we do sirif we could suppose it but she knows how much the marriage is tomiss taylors advantage she knows how very acceptable it must beat miss taylors time of life to be settled in a home of her ownand how important to her to be secure of a comfortable provisionand therefore cannot allow herself to feel so much pain as pleasure.every friend of miss taylor must be glad to have her so happilymarried.and you have forgotten one matter of joy to me said emmaand a very considerable onethat i made the match myself.i made the match you know four years ago and to have it take placeand be proved in the right when so many people said mr. weston wouldnever marry again may comfort me for any thing.mr.
knightley shook his head at her.
her father fondly repliedah my dear i wish you would not make matches and foretell thingsfor whatever you say always comes to pass.
pray do not make anymore matches.i promise you to make none for myself papa but i must indeedfor other people.
it is the greatest amusement in the world andafter such success you knowevery body said that mr. weston wouldnever marry again.
oh dear no mr. weston who had been a widowerso long and who seemed so perfectly comfortable without a wifeso constantly occupied either in his business in town or among hisfriends here always acceptable wherever he went always cheerfulmr.
weston need not spend a single evening in the year alone if he didnot like it.
oh no mr. weston certainly would never marry again.some people even talked of a promise to his wife on her deathbedand others of the son and the uncle not letting him.
all mannerof solemn nonsense was talked on the subject but i believed noneof it.ever since the dayabout four years agothat miss taylor and imet with him in broadway lane when because it began to drizzlehe darted away with so much gallantry and borrowed two umbrellasfor us from farmer mitchells i made up my mind on the subject.i planned the match from that hour and when such success has blessedme in this instance dear papa you cannot think that i shall leaveoff matchmaking.i do not understand what you mean by success said mr. knightley.success supposes endeavour.
your time has been properly anddelicately spent if you have been endeavouring for the last fouryears to bring about this marriage.
a worthy employment for a youngladys mind but if which i rather imagine your making the matchas you call it means only your planning it your saying to yourselfone idle day i think it would be a very good thing for miss taylorif mr. weston were to marry her and saying it again to yourselfevery now and then afterwards why do you talk of success whereis your merit what are you proud of you made a lucky guessand that is all that can be said.and have you never known the pleasure and triumph of a lucky guessi pity you.i thought you clevererfor depend upon it a luckyguess is never merely luck.
there is always some talent in it.and as to my poor word success which you quarrel with i do notknow that i am so entirely without any claim to it.
you have drawntwo pretty pictures but i think there may be a thirda somethingbetween the donothing and the doall.
if i had not promoted mr. westonsvisits here and given many little encouragements and smoothedmany little matters it might not have come to any thing after all.i think you must know hartfield enough to comprehend that.a straightforward openhearted man like weston and a rationalunaffected woman like miss taylor may be safely left to manage theirown concerns.
you are more likely to have done harm to yourselfthan good to them by interference.emma never thinks of herself if she can do good to othersrejoined mr. woodhouse understanding but in part.
but my dearpray do not make any more matches they are silly things and break upones family circle grievously.only one more papa only for mr. elton.
poor mr. elton youlike mr. elton papai must look about for a wife for him.there is nobody in highbury who deserves himand he has beenhere a whole year and has fitted up his house so comfortablythat it would be a shame to have him single any longerand i thoughtwhen he was joining their hands today he looked so very much as ifhe would like to have the same kind office done for him i thinkvery well of mr. elton and this is the only way i have of doinghim a service.mr.
elton is a very pretty young man to be sure and a verygood young man and i have a great regard for him.
but if youwant to shew him any attention my dear ask him to comeand dine with us some day.
that will be a much better thing.i dare say mr. knightley will be so kind as to meet him.with a great deal of pleasure sir at any time said mr. knightleylaughing and i agree with you entirely that it will be a muchbetter thing.
invite him to dinner emma and help him to the bestof the fish and the chicken but leave him to chuse his own wife.depend upon it a man of six or sevenandtwenty can take careof himself.chapter iimr.
weston was a native of highbury and born of a respectable familywhich for the last two or three generations had been rising intogentility and property.
he had received a good education buton succeeding early in life to a small independence had becomeindisposed for any of the more homely pursuits in which his brotherswere engaged and had satisfied an active cheerful mind and socialtemper by entering into the militia of his county then embodied.captain weston was a general favourite and when the chancesof his military life had introduced him to miss churchillof a great yorkshire family and miss churchill fell in lovewith him nobody was surprized except her brother and his wifewho had never seen him and who were full of pride and importancewhich the connexion would offend.miss churchill however being of age and with the full commandof her fortunethough her fortune bore no proportion to thefamilyestatewas not to be dissuaded from the marriage and ittook place to the infinite mortification of mr. and mrs. churchillwho threw her off with due decorum.
it was an unsuitable connexionand did not produce much happiness.
mrs. weston ought to have foundmore in it for she had a husband whose warm heart and sweet tempermade him think every thing due to her in return for the great goodnessof being in love with him but though she had one sort of spiritshe had not the best.
she had resolution enough to pursueher own will in spite of her brother but not enough to refrainfrom unreasonable regrets at that brothers unreasonable angernor from missing the luxuries of her former home.
they lived beyondtheir income but still it was nothing in comparison of enscombeshe did not cease to love her husband but she wanted at onceto be the wife of captain weston and miss churchill of enscombe.captain weston who had been considered especially by the churchillsas making such an amazing match was proved to have much the worstof the bargain for when his wife died after a three years marriagehe was rather a poorer man than at first and with a child to maintain.from the expense of the child however he was soon relieved.the boy had with the additional softening claim of a lingeringillness of his mothers been the means of a sort of reconciliationand mr. and mrs. churchill having no children of their ownnor any other young creature of equal kindred to care for offered totake the whole charge of the little frank soon after her decease.some scruples and some reluctance the widowerfather may be supposedto have felt but as they were overcome by other considerationsthe child was given up to the care and the wealth of the churchillsand he had only his own comfort to seek and his own situation toimprove as he could.a complete change of life became desirable.
he quitted the militiaand engaged in trade having brothers already established in agood way in london which afforded him a favourable opening.it was a concern which brought just employment enough.
he had stilla small house in highbury where most of his leisure days were spentand between useful occupation and the pleasures of societythe next eighteen or twenty years of his life passed cheerfully away.he had by that time realised an easy competenceenough to securethe purchase of a little estate adjoining highbury which he hadalways longed forenough to marry a woman as portionless evenas miss taylor and to live according to the wishes of his ownfriendly and social disposition.it was now some time since miss taylor had begun to influencehis schemes but as it was not the tyrannic influence of youthon youth it had not shaken his determination of never settlingtill he could purchase randalls and the sale of randalls was longlooked forward to but he had gone steadily on with these objectsin view till they were accomplished.
he had made his fortunebought his house and obtained his wife and was beginning a newperiod of existence with every probability of greater happinessthan in any yet passed through.
he had never been an unhappy manhis own temper had secured him from that even in his first marriagebut his second must shew him how delightful a welljudging and trulyamiable woman could be and must give him the pleasantest proofof its being a great deal better to choose than to be chosento excite gratitude than to feel it.he had only himself to please in his choice his fortune washis own for as to frank it was more than being tacitly broughtup as his uncles heir it had become so avowed an adoptionas to have him assume the name of churchill on coming of age.it was most unlikely therefore that he should ever want hisfathers assistance.
his father had no apprehension of it.the aunt was a capricious woman and governed her husband entirelybut it was not in mr. westons nature to imagine that any capricecould be strong enough to affect one so dear and as he believedso deservedly dear.
he saw his son every year in londonand was proud of him and his fond report of him as a very fineyoung man had made highbury feel a sort of pride in him too.he was looked on as sufficiently belonging to the place to make hismerits and prospects a kind of common concern.mr.
frank churchill was one of the boasts of highbury and a livelycuriosity to see him prevailed though the compliment was so littlereturned that he had never been there in his life.
his comingto visit his father had been often talked of but never achieved.now upon his fathers marriage it was very generally proposedas a most proper attention that the visit should take place.there was not a dissentient voice on the subject either whenmrs.
perry drank tea with mrs. and miss bates or when mrs. andmiss bates returned the visit.
now was the time for mr. frankchurchill to come among them and the hope strengthened when it wasunderstood that he had written to his new mother on the occasion.for a few days every morning visit in highbury included some mentionof the handsome letter mrs. weston had received.
i suppose youhave heard of the handsome letter mr. frank churchill has writtento mrs. weston i understand it was a very handsome letter indeed.mr.
woodhouse told me of it.
mr. woodhouse saw the letter and hesays he never saw such a handsome letter in his life.it was indeed a highly prized letter.
mrs. weston had of courseformed a very favourable idea of the young man and such a pleasingattention was an irresistible proof of his great good senseand a most welcome addition to every source and every expressionof congratulation which her marriage had already secured.
she feltherself a most fortunate woman and she had lived long enoughto know how fortunate she might well be thought where the onlyregret was for a partial separation from friends whose friendshipfor her had never cooled and who could ill bear to part with her.she knew that at times she must be missed and could not thinkwithout pain of emmas losing a single pleasure or sufferingan hours ennui from the want of her companionableness but dearemma was of no feeble character she was more equal to her situationthan most girls would have been and had sense and energyand spirits that might be hoped would bear her well and happilythrough its little difficulties and privations.
and then there wassuch comfort in the very easy distance of randalls from hartfieldso convenient for even solitary female walking and in mr. westonsdisposition and circumstances which would make the approachingseason no hindrance to their spending half the evenings in theweek together.her situation was altogether the subject of hours of gratitudeto mrs. weston and of moments only of regret and hersatisfactionher more than satisfactionher cheerful enjoymentwas so just and so apparent that emma well as she knew her fatherwas sometimes taken by surprize at his being still able to pitypoor miss taylor when they left her at randalls in the centreof every domestic comfort or saw her go away in the eveningattended by her pleasant husband to a carriage of her own.but never did she go without mr. woodhouses giving a gentle sighand saying ah poor miss taylor she would be very glad to stay.there was no recovering miss taylornor much likelihood ofceasing to pity her but a few weeks brought some alleviationto mr. woodhouse.
the compliments of his neighbours were overhe was no longer teased by being wished joy of so sorrowful an eventand the weddingcake which had been a great distress to himwas all eat up.
his own stomach could bear nothing rich and hecould never believe other people to be different from himself.what was unwholesome to him he regarded as unfit for any bodyand he had therefore earnestly tried to dissuade them from havingany weddingcake at all and when that proved vain as earnestlytried to prevent any bodys eating it.
he had been at the painsof consulting mr. perry the apothecary on the subject.
mr. perrywas an intelligent gentlemanlike man whose frequent visits were oneof the comforts of mr. woodhouses life and upon being applied tohe could not but acknowledge though it seemed rather against thebias of inclination that weddingcake might certainly disagreewith manyperhaps with most people unless taken moderately.with such an opinion in confirmation of his own mr. woodhouse hopedto influence every visitor of the newly married pair but still thecake was eaten and there was no rest for his benevolent nerves tillit was all gone.there was a strange rumour in highbury of all the little perrysbeing seen with a slice of mrs. westons weddingcake in theirhands but mr. woodhouse would never believe it.chapter iiimr.
woodhouse was fond of society in his own way.
he liked very muchto have his friends come and see him and from various united causesfrom his long residence at hartfield and his good naturefrom his fortune his house and his daughter he could command thevisits of his own little circle in a great measure as he liked.he had not much intercourse with any families beyond that circlehis horror of late hours and large dinnerparties made him unfitfor any acquaintance but such as would visit him on his own terms.fortunately for him highbury including randalls in the same parishand donwell abbey in the parish adjoining the seat of mr. knightleycomprehended many such.
not unfrequently through emmas persuasionhe had some of the chosen and the best to dine with him but eveningparties were what he preferred and unless he fancied himself at anytime unequal to company there was scarcely an evening in the weekin which emma could not make up a cardtable for him.real longstanding regard brought the westons and mr. knightleyand by mr. elton a young man living alone without liking itthe privilege of exchanging any vacant evening of his own blank solitudefor the elegancies and society of mr. woodhouses drawingroomand the smiles of his lovely daughter was in no danger of beingthrown away.after these came a second set among the most comeatableof whom were mrs. and miss bates and mrs. goddard three ladiesalmost always at the service of an invitation from hartfieldand who were fetched and carried home so often that mr. woodhousethought it no hardship for either james or the horses.
had ittaken place only once a year it would have been a grievance.mrs.
bates the widow of a former vicar of highbury was avery old lady almost past every thing but tea and quadrille.she lived with her single daughter in a very small way and wasconsidered with all the regard and respect which a harmless old ladyunder such untoward circumstances can excite.
her daughter enjoyeda most uncommon degree of popularity for a woman neither younghandsome rich nor married.
miss bates stood in the very worstpredicament in the world for having much of the public favourand she had no intellectual superiority to make atonement to herselfor frighten those who might hate her into outward respect.she had never boasted either beauty or cleverness.
her youthhad passed without distinction and her middle of life was devotedto the care of a failing mother and the endeavour to make a smallincome go as far as possible.
and yet she was a happy womanand a woman whom no one named without goodwill.
it was her ownuniversal goodwill and contented temper which worked such wonders.she loved every body was interested in every bodys happinessquicksighted to every bodys merits thought herself a most fortunatecreature and surrounded with blessings in such an excellent motherand so many good neighbours and friends and a home that wantedfor nothing.
the simplicity and cheerfulness of her natureher contented and grateful spirit were a recommendation to every bodyand a mine of felicity to herself.
she was a great talker uponlittle matters which exactly suited mr. woodhouse full of trivialcommunications and harmless gossip.mrs.
goddard was the mistress of a schoolnot of a seminaryor an establishment or any thing which professed in long sentences ofrefined nonsense to combine liberal acquirements with elegant moralityupon new principles and new systemsand where young ladies forenormous pay might be screwed out of health and into vanitybuta real honest oldfashioned boardingschool where a reasonablequantity of accomplishments were sold at a reasonable priceand where girls might be sent to be out of the way and scramblethemselves into a little education without any danger of comingback prodigies.
mrs. goddards school was in high reputeandvery deservedly for highbury was reckoned a particularly healthyspot she had an ample house and garden gave the children plentyof wholesome food let them run about a great deal in the summerand in winter dressed their chilblains with her own hands.it was no wonder that a train of twenty young couple now walkedafter her to church.
she was a plain motherly kind of womanwho had worked hard in her youth and now thought herself entitledto the occasional holiday of a teavisit and having formerlyowed much to mr. woodhouses kindness felt his particular claimon her to leave her neat parlour hung round with fancyworkwhenever she could and win or lose a few sixpences by his fireside.these were the ladies whom emma found herself very frequentlyable to collect and happy was she for her fathers sakein the power though as far as she was herself concernedit was no remedy for the absence of mrs. weston.
she was delightedto see her father look comfortable and very much pleased withherself for contriving things so well but the quiet prosingsof three such women made her feel that every evening so spentwas indeed one of the long evenings she had fearfully anticipated.as she sat one morning looking forward to exactly such a closeof the present day a note was brought from mrs. goddard requestingin most respectful terms to be allowed to bring miss smith with hera most welcome request for miss smith was a girl of seventeenwhom emma knew very well by sight and had long felt an interest inon account of her beauty.
a very gracious invitation was returnedand the evening no longer dreaded by the fair mistress of the mansion.harriet smith was the natural daughter of somebody.
somebody hadplaced her several years back at mrs. goddards schooland somebody had lately raised her from the condition of scholarto that of parlourboarder.
this was all that was generally knownof her history.
she had no visible friends but what had beenacquired at highbury and was now just returned from a long visitin the country to some young ladies who had been at school there with her.she was a very pretty girl and her beauty happened to be of a sortwhich emma particularly admired.
she was short plump and fairwith a fine bloom blue eyes light hair regular featuresand a look of great sweetness and before the end of the eveningemma was as much pleased with her manners as her person and quitedetermined to continue the acquaintance.she was not struck by any thing remarkably clever in miss smithsconversation but she found her altogether very engagingnotinconveniently shy not unwilling to talkand yet so far from pushingshewing so proper and becoming a deference seeming so pleasantlygrateful for being admitted to hartfield and so artlesslyimpressed by the appearance of every thing in so superior a styleto what she had been used to that she must have good senseand deserve encouragement.
encouragement should be given.those soft blue eyes and all those natural graces should not bewasted on the inferior society of highbury and its connexions.the acquaintance she had already formed were unworthy of her.the friends from whom she had just parted though very good sortof people must be doing her harm.
they were a family of the nameof martin whom emma well knew by character as renting a large farmof mr. knightley and residing in the parish of donwellvery creditablyshe believedshe knew mr. knightley thought highly of thembut theymust be coarse and unpolished and very unfit to be the intimatesof a girl who wanted only a little more knowledge and eleganceto be quite perfect.
she would notice her she would improve hershe would detach her from her bad acquaintance and introduce herinto good society she would form her opinions and her manners.it would be an interesting and certainly a very kind undertakinghighly becoming her own situation in life her leisure and powers.she was so busy in admiring those soft blue eyes in talkingand listening and forming all these schemes in the inbetweens thatthe evening flew away at a very unusual rate and the suppertablewhich always closed such parties and for which she had beenused to sit and watch the due time was all set out and readyand moved forwards to the fire before she was aware.
with analacrity beyond the common impulse of a spirit which yet was neverindifferent to the credit of doing every thing well and attentivelywith the real goodwill of a mind delighted with its own ideasdid she then do all the honours of the meal and help and recommendthe minced chicken and scalloped oysters with an urgency which sheknew would be acceptable to the early hours and civil scruples of their guests.upon such occasions poor mr. woodhouses feelings were in sad warfare.he loved to have the cloth laid because it had been the fashionof his youth but his conviction of suppers being very unwholesomemade him rather sorry to see any thing put on it and while hishospitality would have welcomed his visitors to every thinghis care for their health made him grieve that they would eat.such another small basin of thin gruel as his own was all thathe could with thorough selfapprobation recommend though hemight constrain himself while the ladies were comfortably clearingthe nicer things to saymrs.
bates let me propose your venturing on one of these eggs.an egg boiled very soft is not unwholesome.
serle understands boilingan egg better than any body.
i would not recommend an egg boiledby any body else but you need not be afraid they are very smallyou seeone of our small eggs will not hurt you.
miss bateslet emma help you to a little bit of tarta very little bit.ours are all appletarts.
you need not be afraid of unwholesomepreserves here.
i do not advise the custard.
mrs. goddard what sayyou to half a glass of wine a small halfglass put into a tumblerof water i do not think it could disagree with you.emma allowed her father to talkbut supplied her visitors ina much more satisfactory style and on the present evening hadparticular pleasure in sending them away happy.
the happinessof miss smith was quite equal to her intentions.
miss woodhousewas so great a personage in highbury that the prospect of theintroduction had given as much panic as pleasure but the humblegrateful little girl went off with highly gratified feelingsdelighted with the affability with which miss woodhouse had treatedher all the evening and actually shaken hands with her at lastchapter ivharriet smiths intimacy at hartfield was soon a settled thing.quick and decided in her ways emma lost no time in inviting encouragingand telling her to come very often and as their acquaintance increasedso did their satisfaction in each other.
as a walking companionemma had very early foreseen how useful she might find her.in that respect mrs. westons loss had been important.
her fathernever went beyond the shrubbery where two divisions of the groundsufficed him for his long walk or his short as the year variedand since mrs. westons marriage her exercise had been too much confined.she had ventured once alone to randalls but it was not pleasantand a harriet smith therefore one whom she could summon at anytime to a walk would be a valuable addition to her privileges.but in every respect as she saw more of her she approved herand was confirmed in all her kind designs.harriet certainly was not clever but she had a sweet docilegrateful disposition was totally free from conceit and only desiringto be guided by any one she looked up to.
her early attachmentto herself was very amiable and her inclination for good companyand power of appreciating what was elegant and clever shewed thatthere was no want of taste though strength of understanding mustnot be expected.
altogether she was quite convinced of harrietsmiths being exactly the young friend she wantedexactly thesomething which her home required.
such a friend as mrs. westonwas out of the question.
two such could never be granted.two such she did not want.
it was quite a different sort of thinga sentiment distinct and independent.
mrs. weston was the objectof a regard which had its basis in gratitude and esteem.harriet would be loved as one to whom she could be useful.for mrs. weston there was nothing to be done for harriet every thing.her first attempts at usefulness were in an endeavour to find out whowere the parents but harriet could not tell.
she was ready to tellevery thing in her power but on this subject questions were vain.emma was obliged to fancy what she likedbut she could neverbelieve that in the same situation she should not have discoveredthe truth.
harriet had no penetration.
she had been satisfiedto hear and believe just what mrs. goddard chose to tell herand looked no farther.mrs.
goddard and the teachers and the girls and the affairs of theschool in general formed naturally a great part of the conversationandbut for her acquaintance with the martins of abbeymill farmit must have been the whole.
but the martins occupied her thoughtsa good deal she had spent two very happy months with themand now loved to talk of the pleasures of her visit and describethe many comforts and wonders of the place.
emma encouraged hertalkativenessamused by such a picture of another set of beingsand enjoying the youthful simplicity which could speak with so muchexultation of mrs. martins having two parlours two very good parloursindeed one of them quite as large as mrs. goddards drawingroomand of her having an upper maid who had lived fiveandtwenty yearswith her and of their having eight cows two of them alderneysand one a little welch cow a very pretty little welch cow indeedand of mrs. martins saying as she was so fond of it it should becalled her cow and of their having a very handsome summerhousein their garden where some day next year they were all to drinkteaa very handsome summerhouse large enough to hold a dozen people.for some time she was amused without thinking beyond the immediate causebut as she came to understand the family better other feelings arose.she had taken up a wrong idea fancying it was a mother and daughtera son and sons wife who all lived together but when it appearedthat the mr. martin who bore a part in the narrative and was alwaysmentioned with approbation for his great goodnature in doing somethingor other was a single man that there was no young mrs. martinno wife in the case she did suspect danger to her poor littlefriend from all this hospitality and kindness and that if shewere not taken care of she might be required to sink herself forever.with this inspiriting notion her questions increased in numberand meaning and she particularly led harriet to talk more of mr. martinand there was evidently no dislike to it.
harriet was very readyto speak of the share he had had in their moonlight walks and merryevening games and dwelt a good deal upon his being so very goodhumouredand obliging.
he had gone three miles round one day in order to bringher some walnuts because she had said how fond she was of themand in every thing else he was so very obliging.
he had hisshepherds son into the parlour one night on purpose to sing to her.she was very fond of singing.
he could sing a little himself.she believed he was very clever and understood every thing.he had a very fine flock and while she was with themhe had been bid more for his wool than any body in the country.she believed every body spoke well of him.
his mother and sisterswere very fond of him.
mrs. martin had told her one day and therewas a blush as she said it that it was impossible for any bodyto be a better son and therefore she was sure whenever he marriedhe would make a good husband.
not that she wanted him to marry.she was in no hurry at all.well done mrs. martin thought emma.
you know what you are about.and when she had come away mrs. martin was so very kind as to sendmrs.
goddard a beautiful goosethe finest goose mrs. goddard hadever seen.
mrs. goddard had dressed it on a sunday and asked allthe three teachers miss nash and miss prince and miss richardsonto sup with her.mr.
martin i suppose is not a man of information beyond the lineof his own business he does not readoh yesthat is noi do not knowbut i believe he hasread a good dealbut not what you would think any thing of.he reads the agricultural reports and some other books that layin one of the window seatsbut he reads all them to himself.but sometimes of an evening before we went to cards he would readsomething aloud out of the elegant extracts very entertaining.and i know he has read the vicar of wakefield.
he never read theromance of the forest nor the children of the abbey.
he had neverheard of such books before i mentioned them but he is determinedto get them now as soon as ever he can.the next question waswhat sort of looking man is mr. martinoh not handsomenot at all handsome.
i thought him very plainat first but i do not think him so plain now.
one does not you knowafter a time.
but did you never see him he is in highbury everynow and then and he is sure to ride through every week in his wayto kingston.
he has passed you very often.that may be and i may have seen him fifty times but withouthaving any idea of his name.
a young farmer whether on horsebackor on foot is the very last sort of person to raise my curiosity.the yeomanry are precisely the order of people with whom i feel ican have nothing to do.
a degree or two lower and a creditableappearance might interest me i might hope to be useful to theirfamilies in some way or other.
but a farmer can need none of my helpand is therefore in one sense as much above my notice as in everyother he is below it.to be sure.
oh yes it is not likely you should ever haveobserved him but he knows you very well indeedi mean by sight.i have no doubt of his being a very respectable young man.i know indeed that he is so and as such wish him well.what do you imagine his age to behe was fourandtwenty the th of last june and my birthday isthe rd just a fortnight and a days differencewhich is very odd.only fourandtwenty.
that is too young to settle.
his mother isperfectly right not to be in a hurry.
they seem very comfortableas they are and if she were to take any pains to marry himshe would probably repent it.
six years hence if he could meetwith a good sort of young woman in the same rank as his ownwith a little money it might be very desirable.six years hence dear miss woodhouse he would be thirty years oldwell and that is as early as most men can afford to marrywho are not born to an independence.
mr. martin i imaginehas his fortune entirely to makecannot be at all beforehand withthe world.
whatever money he might come into when his father diedwhatever his share of the family property it is i dare sayall afloat all employed in his stock and so forth and thoughwith diligence and good luck he may be rich in time it is next toimpossible that he should have realised any thing yet.to be sure so it is.
but they live very comfortably.they have no indoors man else they do not want for any thingand mrs. martin talks of taking a boy another year.i wish you may not get into a scrape harriet whenever he doesmarryi mean as to being acquainted with his wifefor thoughhis sisters from a superior education are not to be altogetherobjected to it does not follow that he might marry any body at all fitfor you to notice.
the misfortune of your birth ought to make youparticularly careful as to your associates.
there can be no doubtof your being a gentlemans daughter and you must support yourclaim to that station by every thing within your own power or therewill be plenty of people who would take pleasure in degrading you.yes to be sure i suppose there are.
but while i visitat hartfield and you are so kind to me miss woodhousei am not afraid of what any body can do.you understand the force of influence pretty well harriet but iwould have you so firmly established in good society as to beindependent even of hartfield and miss woodhouse.
i want to see youpermanently well connected and to that end it will be advisableto have as few odd acquaintance as may be and therefore i saythat if you should still be in this country when mr. martin marriesi wish you may not be drawn in by your intimacy with the sistersto be acquainted with the wife who will probably be some merefarmers daughter without education.to be sure.
yes.
not that i think mr. martin would ever marry any bodybut what had had some educationand been very well brought up.however i do not mean to set up my opinion against yoursand iam sure i shall not wish for the acquaintance of his wife.
i shallalways have a great regard for the miss martins especially elizabethand should be very sorry to give them up for they are quite as welleducated as me.
but if he marries a very ignorant vulgar womancertainly i had better not visit her if i can help it.emma watched her through the fluctuations of this speechand saw no alarming symptoms of love.
the young man had beenthe first admirer but she trusted there was no other holdand that there would be no serious difficulty on harriets sideto oppose any friendly arrangement of her own.they met mr. martin the very next day as they were walking on thedonwell road.
he was on foot and after looking very respectfullyat her looked with most unfeigned satisfaction at her companion.emma was not sorry to have such an opportunity of surveyand walking a few yards forward while they talked together soon madeher quick eye sufficiently acquainted with mr. robert martin.his appearance was very neat and he looked like a sensible young manbut his person had no other advantage and when he came to becontrasted with gentlemen she thought he must lose all the groundhe had gained in harriets inclination.
harriet was not insensibleof manner she had voluntarily noticed her fathers gentlenesswith admiration as well as wonder.
mr. martin looked as if hedid not know what manner was.they remained but a few minutes together as miss woodhouse mustnot be kept waiting and harriet then came running to her with asmiling face and in a flutter of spirits which miss woodhousehoped very soon to compose.only think of our happening to meet himhow very odd it wasquite a chance he said that he had not gone round by randalls.he did not think we ever walked this road.
he thought we walkedtowards randalls most days.
he has not been able to get theromance of the forest yet.
he was so busy the last time he wasat kingston that he quite forgot it but he goes again tomorrow.so very odd we should happen to meet well miss woodhouse is helike what you expected what do you think of him do you think himso very plainhe is very plain undoubtedlyremarkably plainbut that isnothing compared with his entire want of gentility.
i had noright to expect much and i did not expect much but i had noidea that he could be so very clownish so totally without air.i had imagined him i confess a degree or two nearer gentility.to be sure said harriet in a mortified voice he is notso genteel as real gentlemen.i think harriet since your acquaintance with us you have beenrepeatedly in the company of some such very real gentlementhat you must yourself be struck with the difference in mr. martin.at hartfield you have had very good specimens of well educatedwell bred men.
i should be surprized if after seeing themyou could be in company with mr. martin again without perceivinghim to be a very inferior creatureand rather wondering atyourself for having ever thought him at all agreeable before.do not you begin to feel that now were not you struck i am sureyou must have been struck by his awkward look and abrupt mannerand the uncouthness of a voice which i heard to be wholly unmodulatedas i stood here.certainly he is not like mr. knightley.
he has not such a fineair and way of walking as mr. knightley.
i see the differenceplain enough.
but mr. knightley is so very fine a manmr.
knightleys air is so remarkably good that it is not fairto compare mr. martin with him.
you might not see one in a hundredwith gentleman so plainly written as in mr. knightley.
but he isnot the only gentleman you have been lately used to.
what say youto mr. weston and mr. elton compare mr. martin with either of them.compare their manner of carrying themselves of walking of speakingof being silent.
you must see the difference.oh yesthere is a great difference.
but mr. weston is almostan old man.
mr. weston must be between forty and fifty.which makes his good manners the more valuable.
the older aperson grows harriet the more important it is that their mannersshould not be bad the more glaring and disgusting any loudnessor coarseness or awkwardness becomes.
what is passable in youthis detestable in later age.
mr. martin is now awkward and abruptwhat will he be at mr. westons time of lifethere is no saying indeed replied harriet rather solemnly.but there may be pretty good guessing.
he will be a completely grossvulgar farmer totally inattentive to appearances and thinkingof nothing but profit and loss.will he indeed that will be very bad.how much his business engrosses him already is very plain from thecircumstance of his forgetting to inquire for the book you recommended.he was a great deal too full of the market to think of any thingelsewhich is just as it should be for a thriving man.
what hashe to do with books and i have no doubt that he will thriveand be a very rich man in timeand his being illiterate and coarseneed not disturb us.i wonder he did not remember the bookwas all harriets answerand spoken with a degree of grave displeasure which emma thought mightbe safely left to itself.
she therefore said no more for some time.her next beginning wasin one respect perhaps mr. eltons manners are superiorto mr. knightleys or mr. westons.
they have more gentleness.they might be more safely held up as a pattern.
there is an opennessa quickness almost a bluntness in mr. weston which every bodylikes in him because there is so much goodhumour with itbutthat would not do to be copied.
neither would mr. knightleysdownright decided commanding sort of manner though it suitshim very well his figure and look and situation in life seemto allow it but if any young man were to set about copying himhe would not be sufferable.
on the contrary i think a young manmight be very safely recommended to take mr. elton as a model.mr.
elton is goodhumoured cheerful obliging and gentle.he seems to me to be grown particularly gentle of late.
i do notknow whether he has any design of ingratiating himself with eitherof us harriet by additional softness but it strikes me that hismanners are softer than they used to be.
if he means any thingit must be to please you.
did not i tell you what he said of youthe other dayshe then repeated some warm personal praise which she had drawnfrom mr. elton and now did full justice to and harriet blushedand smiled and said she had always thought mr. elton very agreeable.mr.
elton was the very person fixed on by emma for drivingthe young farmer out of harriets head.
she thought it wouldbe an excellent match and only too palpably desirable naturaland probable for her to have much merit in planning it.she feared it was what every body else must think of and predict.it was not likely however that any body should have equalledher in the date of the plan as it had entered her brain duringthe very first evening of harriets coming to hartfield.
the longershe considered it the greater was her sense of its expediency.mr.
eltons situation was most suitable quite the gentleman himselfand without low connexions at the same time not of any familythat could fairly object to the doubtful birth of harriet.
he had acomfortable home for her and emma imagined a very sufficient incomefor though the vicarage of highbury was not large he was knownto have some independent property and she thought very highlyof him as a goodhumoured wellmeaning respectable young manwithout any deficiency of useful understanding or knowledge of the world.she had already satisfied herself that he thought harriet a beautifulgirl which she trusted with such frequent meetings at hartfieldwas foundation enough on his side and on harriets there could belittle doubt that the idea of being preferred by him would have allthe usual weight and efficacy.
and he was really a very pleasingyoung man a young man whom any woman not fastidious might like.he was reckoned very handsome his person much admired in generalthough not by her there being a want of elegance of feature whichshe could not dispense withbut the girl who could be gratifiedby a robert martins riding about the country to get walnutsfor her might very well be conquered by mr. eltons admiration.chapter vi do not know what your opinion may be mrs. weston said mr. knightley ofthis great intimacy between emma and harriet smith but i think it a bad thing.a bad thing do you really think it a bad thingwhy soi think they will neither of them do the other any good.you surprize me emma must do harriet good and by supplying herwith a new object of interest harriet may be said to do emma good.i have been seeing their intimacy with the greatest pleasure.how very differently we feelnot think they will do each other anygood this will certainly be the beginning of one of our quarrelsabout emma mr. knightley.perhaps you think i am come on purpose to quarrel with youknowing weston to be out and that you must still fight your own battle.mr.
weston would undoubtedly support me if he were herefor he thinks exactly as i do on the subject.
we were speakingof it only yesterday and agreeing how fortunate it was for emmathat there should be such a girl in highbury for her to associate with.mr.
knightley i shall not allow you to be a fair judge in this case.you are so much used to live alone that you do not know the valueof a companion and perhaps no man can be a good judge of the comforta woman feels in the society of one of her own sex after being usedto it all her life.
i can imagine your objection to harriet smith.she is not the superior young woman which emmas friend ought to be.but on the other hand as emma wants to see her better informedit will be an inducement to her to read more herself.
they willread together.
she means it i know.emma has been meaning to read more ever since she was twelveyears old.
i have seen a great many lists of her drawingup atvarious times of books that she meant to read regularly throughandvery good lists they werevery well chosen and very neatlyarrangedsometimes alphabetically and sometimes by some other rule.the list she drew up when only fourteeni remember thinking itdid her judgment so much credit that i preserved it some timeand i dare say she may have made out a very good list now.
but ihave done with expecting any course of steady reading from emma.she will never submit to any thing requiring industry and patienceand a subjection of the fancy to the understanding.
where miss taylorfailed to stimulate i may safely affirm that harriet smith will donothing.you never could persuade her to read half so much as youwished.you know you could not.i dare say replied mrs. weston smiling that i thoughtso thenbut since we have parted i can never remember emmasomitting to do any thing i wished.there is hardly any desiring to refresh such a memory as thatsaidmr.
knightley feelingly and for a moment or two he had done.
but ihe soon added who have had no such charm thrown over my sensesmust still see hear and remember.
emma is spoiled by being thecleverest of her family.
at ten years old she had the misfortune ofbeing able to answer questions which puzzled her sister at seventeen.she was always quick and assured isabella slow and diffident.and ever since she was twelve emma has been mistress of the houseand of you all.
in her mother she lost the only person able to copewith her.
she inherits her mothers talents and must have beenunder subjection to her.i should have been sorry mr. knightley to be dependent onyour recommendation had i quitted mr. woodhouses family and wantedanother situation i do not think you would have spoken a good word forme to any body.
i am sure you always thought me unfit for the office i held.yes said he smiling.
you are better placed here very fitfor a wife but not at all for a governess.
but you were preparingyourself to be an excellent wife all the time you were at hartfield.you might not give emma such a complete education as your powers wouldseem to promise but you were receiving a very good education from heron the very material matrimonial point of submitting your own willand doing as you were bid and if weston had asked me to recommendhim a wife i should certainly have named miss taylor.thank you.
there will be very little merit in making a good wifeto such a man as mr. weston.why to own the truth i am afraid you are rather thrown awayand that with every disposition to bear there will be nothingto be borne.
we will not despair however.
weston may grow crossfrom the wantonness of comfort or his son may plague him.i hope not that.it is not likely.
no mr. knightley do notforetell vexation from that quarter.not i indeed.
i only name possibilities.
i do not pretend to emmasgenius for foretelling and guessing.
i hope with all my heartthe young man may be a weston in merit and a churchill in fortune.butharriet smithi have not half done about harriet smith.
i thinkher the very worst sort of companion that emma could possibly have.she knows nothing herself and looks upon emma as knowing every thing.she is a flatterer in all her ways and so much the worsebecause undesigned.
her ignorance is hourly flattery.
how canemma imagine she has any thing to learn herself while harrietis presenting such a delightful inferiority and as for harrieti will venture to say that she cannot gain by the acquaintance.hartfield will only put her out of conceit with all the other placesshe belongs to.
she will grow just refined enough to be uncomfortablewith those among whom birth and circumstances have placed her home.i am much mistaken if emmas doctrines give any strength of mindor tend at all to make a girl adapt herself rationally to the varietiesof her situation in life.they only give a little polish.i either depend more upon emmas good sense than you do or am moreanxious for her present comfort for i cannot lament the acquaintance.how well she looked last nightoh you would rather talk of her person than her mind would youvery well i shall not attempt to deny emmas being pretty.pretty say beautiful rather.
can you imagine any thing nearerperfect beauty than emma altogetherface and figurei do not know what i could imagine but i confess that i haveseldom seen a face or figure more pleasing to me than hers.but i am a partial old friend.such an eyethe true hazle eyeand so brilliant regular featuresopen countenance with a complexion oh what a bloom of full healthand such a pretty height and size such a firm and upright figurethere is health not merely in her bloom but in her air her headher glance.
one hears sometimes of a child being the pictureof health now emma always gives me the idea of being the completepicture of grownup health.
she is loveliness itself.
mr. knightleyis not shei have not a fault to find with her person he replied.i think her all you describe.
i love to look at her and iwill add this praise that i do not think her personally vain.considering how very handsome she is she appears to be littleoccupied with it her vanity lies another way.
mrs. weston i amnot to be talked out of my dislike of harriet smith or my dreadof its doing them both harm.and i mr. knightley am equally stout in my confidence of itsnot doing them any harm.
with all dear emmas little faultsshe is an excellent creature.
where shall we see a better daughteror a kinder sister or a truer friend no no she has qualitieswhich may be trusted she will never lead any one really wrongshe will make no lasting blunder where emma errs once she is in theright a hundred times.very well i will not plague you any more.
emma shall be an angeland i will keep my spleen to myself till christmas brings johnand isabella.
john loves emma with a reasonable and thereforenot a blind affection and isabella always thinks as he doesexcept when he is not quite frightened enough about the children.i am sure of having their opinions with me.i know that you all love her really too well to be unjust or unkindbut excuse me mr. knightley if i take the liberty i consider myselfyou know as having somewhat of the privilege of speech that emmasmother might have had the liberty of hinting that i do not thinkany possible good can arise from harriet smiths intimacy being madea matter of much discussion among you.
pray excuse me but supposingany little inconvenience may be apprehended from the intimacyit cannot be expected that emma accountable to nobody but her fatherwho perfectly approves the acquaintance should put an end to itso long as it is a source of pleasure to herself.
it has been somany years my province to give advice that you cannot be surprizedmr.
knightley at this little remains of office.not at all cried he i am much obliged to you for it.it is very good advice and it shall have a better fate than youradvice has often found for it shall be attended to.mrs.
john knightley is easily alarmed and might be made unhappyabout her sister.be satisfied said he i will not raise any outcry.
i will keepmy illhumour to myself.
i have a very sincere interest in emma.isabella does not seem more my sister has never excited agreater interest perhaps hardly so great.
there is an anxietya curiosity in what one feels for emma.
i wonder what will becomeof herso do i said mrs. weston gently very much.she always declares she will never marry which of coursemeans just nothing at all.
but i have no idea that she has yetever seen a man she cared for.
it would not be a bad thing for herto be very much in love with a proper object.
i should like to seeemma in love and in some doubt of a return it would do her good.but there is nobody hereabouts to attach her and she goes so seldomfrom home.there does indeed seem as little to tempt her to breakher resolution at present said mrs. weston as can well beand while she is so happy at hartfield i cannot wish her to beforming any attachment which would be creating such difficultieson poor mr. woodhouses account.
i do not recommend matrimonyat present to emma though i mean no slight to the state i assure you.part of her meaning was to conceal some favourite thoughts ofher own and mr. westons on the subject as much as possible.there were wishes at randalls respecting emmas destiny but itwas not desirable to have them suspected and the quiet transitionwhich mr. knightley soon afterwards made to what does westonthink of the weather shall we have rain convinced her that hehad nothing more to say or surmise about hartfield.chapter viemma could not feel a doubt of having given harriets fancya proper direction and raised the gratitude of her young vanityto a very good purpose for she found her decidedly more sensiblethan before of mr. eltons being a remarkably handsome man with mostagreeable manners and as she had no hesitation in following upthe assurance of his admiration by agreeable hints she was soonpretty confident of creating as much liking on harriets sideas there could be any occasion for.
she was quite convincedof mr. eltons being in the fairest way of falling in loveif not in love already.
she had no scruple with regard to him.he talked of harriet and praised her so warmly that she couldnot suppose any thing wanting which a little time would not add.his perception of the striking improvement of harriets mannersince her introduction at hartfield was not one of the leastagreeable proofs of his growing attachment.you have given miss smith all that she required said heyou have made her graceful and easy.
she was a beautiful creaturewhen she came to you but in my opinion the attractions you haveadded are infinitely superior to what she received from nature.i am glad you think i have been useful to her but harrietonly wanted drawing out and receiving a few very few hints.she had all the natural grace of sweetness of temper and artlessnessin herself.
i have done very little.if it were admissible to contradict a lady said the gallantmr.
eltoni have perhaps given her a little more decision of characterhave taught her to think on points which had not fallen in herway before.exactly so that is what principally strikes me.
so much superaddeddecision of character skilful has been the handgreat has been the pleasure i am sure.
i never met witha disposition more truly amiable.i have no doubt of it.
and it was spoken with a sortof sighing animation which had a vast deal of the lover.she was not less pleased another day with the mannerin which he seconded a sudden wish of hers to have harriets picture.did you ever have your likeness taken harriet said she didyou ever sit for your pictureharriet was on the point of leaving the room and only stopt to saywith a very interesting naiveteoh dear no never.no sooner was she out of sight than emma exclaimedwhat an exquisite possession a good picture of her would be i wouldgive any money for it.
i almost long to attempt her likeness myself.you do not know it i dare say but two or three years ago i hada great passion for taking likenesses and attempted several ofmy friends and was thought to have a tolerable eye in general.but from one cause or another i gave it up in disgust.but really i could almost venture if harriet would sit to me.it would be such a delight to have her picturelet me entreat you cried mr. elton it would indeed be a delightlet me entreat you miss woodhouse to exercise so charming atalent in favour of your friend.
i know what your drawings are.how could you suppose me ignorant is not this room rich inspecimens of your landscapes and flowers and has not mrs. westonsome inimitable figurepieces in her drawingroom at randallsyes good manthought emmabut what has all that to do with takinglikenesses you know nothing of drawing.
dont pretend to bein raptures about mine.
keep your raptures for harriets face.well if you give me such kind encouragement mr. elton i believei shall try what i can do.
harriets features are very delicatewhich makes a likeness difficult and yet there is a peculiarityin the shape of the eye and the lines about the mouth which one oughtto catch.exactly sothe shape of the eye and the lines about the mouthihave not a doubt of your success.
pray pray attempt it.as you will do it it will indeed to use your own wordsbe an exquisite possession.but i am afraid mr. elton harriet will not like to sit.she thinks so little of her own beauty.
did not you observe hermanner of answering me how completely it meant why should mypicture be drawnoh yes i observed it i assure you.
it was not lost on me.but still i cannot imagine she would not be persuaded.harriet was soon back again and the proposal almost immediately madeand she had no scruples which could stand many minutes against the earnestpressing of both the others.
emma wished to go to work directlyand therefore produced the portfolio containing her various attemptsat portraits for not one of them had ever been finished that theymight decide together on the best size for harriet.
her manybeginnings were displayed.
miniatures halflengths wholelengthspencil crayon and watercolours had been all tried in turn.she had always wanted to do every thing and had made more progressboth in drawing and music than many might have done with so littlelabour as she would ever submit to.
she played and sangand drewin almost every style but steadiness had always been wantingand in nothing had she approached the degree of excellence which shewould have been glad to command and ought not to have failed of.she was not much deceived as to her own skill either as an artistor a musician but she was not unwilling to have others deceivedor sorry to know her reputation for accomplishment often higherthan it deserved.there was merit in every drawingin the least finished perhaps the mosther style was spirited but had there been much less or had therebeen ten times more the delight and admiration of her two companionswould have been the same.
they were both in ecstasies.
a likenesspleases every body and miss woodhouses performances must be capital.no great variety of faces for you said emma.
i had only myown family to study from.
there is my fatheranother of myfatherbut the idea of sitting for his picture made him so nervousthat i could only take him by stealth neither of them verylike therefore.
mrs. weston again and again and again you see.dear mrs. weston always my kindest friend on every occasion.she would sit whenever i asked her.
there is my sister and reallyquite her own little elegant figureand the face not unlike.i should have made a good likeness of her if she would havesat longer but she was in such a hurry to have me draw her fourchildren that she would not be quiet.
then here come all myattempts at three of those four childrenthere they arehenry and john and bella from one end of the sheet to the otherand any one of them might do for any one of the rest.
she was soeager to have them drawn that i could not refuse but there is nomaking children of three or four years old stand still you knownor can it be very easy to take any likeness of them beyond theair and complexion unless they are coarser featured than anyof mamas children ever were.
here is my sketch of the fourthwho was a baby.
i took him as he was sleeping on the sofa and itis as strong a likeness of his cockade as you would wish to see.he had nestled down his head most conveniently.
thats very like.i am rather proud of little george.
the corner of the sofa is very good.then here is my lastunclosing a pretty sketch of a gentlemanin small size wholelengthmy last and my bestmy brothermr.
john knightley.this did not want much of being finished when iput it away in a pet and vowed i would never take another likeness.i could not help being provoked for after all my pains and when ihad really made a very good likeness of itmrs.
weston and iwere quite agreed in thinking it very likeonly too handsometooflatteringbut that was a fault on the right sideafterall this came poor dear isabellas cold approbation ofyesit was a little likebut to be sure it did not do him justice.we had had a great deal of trouble in persuading him to sit at all.it was made a great favour of and altogether it was more than icould bear and so i never would finish it to have it apologisedover as an unfavourable likeness to every morning visitor inbrunswick squareand as i said i did then forswear ever drawingany body again.
but for harriets sake or rather for my ownand as there are no husbands and wives in the case at presenti will break my resolution now.mr.
elton seemed very properly struck and delighted by the ideaand was repeating no husbands and wives in the case at presentindeed as you observe.
exactly so.
no husbands and wiveswith so interesting a consciousness that emma began to considerwhether she had not better leave them together at once.
but as shewanted to be drawing the declaration must wait a little longer.she had soon fixed on the size and sort of portrait.it was to be a wholelength in watercolours like mr. johnknightleys and was destined if she could please herselfto hold a very honourable station over the mantelpiece.the sitting began and harriet smiling and blushing and afraidof not keeping her attitude and countenance presented a very sweetmixture of youthful expression to the steady eyes of the artist.but there was no doing any thing with mr. elton fidgeting behindher and watching every touch.
she gave him credit for stationinghimself where he might gaze and gaze again without offencebut was really obliged to put an end to it and request him toplace himself elsewhere.
it then occurred to her to employ himin reading.if he would be so good as to read to them it would be a kindnessindeed it would amuse away the difficulties of her part and lessenthe irksomeness of miss smiths.mr.
elton was only too happy.
harriet listened and emma drewin peace.
she must allow him to be still frequently coming to lookany thing less would certainly have been too little in a loverand he was ready at the smallest intermission of the pencilto jump up and see the progress and be charmed.there was nobeing displeased with such an encourager for his admirationmade him discern a likeness almost before it was possible.she could not respect his eye but his love and his complaisancewere unexceptionable.the sitting was altogether very satisfactory she was quiteenough pleased with the first days sketch to wish to go on.there was no want of likeness she had been fortunate in the attitudeand as she meant to throw in a little improvement to the figureto give a little more height and considerably more elegance she hadgreat confidence of its being in every way a pretty drawing at lastand of its filling its destined place with credit to them bothastanding memorial of the beauty of one the skill of the otherand the friendship of both with as many other agreeable associationsas mr. eltons very promising attachment was likely to add.harriet was to sit again the next day and mr. elton just as he oughtentreated for the permission of attending and reading to them again.by all means.
we shall be most happy to consider you as oneof the party.the same civilities and courtesies the same success and satisfactiontook place on the morrow and accompanied the whole progressof the picture which was rapid and happy.
every body who saw itwas pleased but mr. elton was in continual raptures and defendedit through every criticism.miss woodhouse has given her friend the only beauty shewantedobserved mrs. weston to himnot in the least suspectingthat she was addressing a lover.the expression of the eye ismost correct but miss smith has not those eyebrows and eyelashes.it is the fault of her face that she has them not.do you think so replied he.
i cannot agree with you.it appears to me a most perfect resemblance in every feature.i never saw such a likeness in my life.
we must allow for the effectof shade you know.you have made her too tall emma said mr. knightley.emma knew that she had but would not own it and mr. elton warmly addedoh no certainly not too tall not in the least too tall.
considershe is sitting downwhich naturally presents a differentwhichin short gives exactly the ideaand the proportions mustbe preserved you know.
proportions foreshortening.oh no itgives one exactly the idea of such a height as miss smiths.
exactly so indeedit is very pretty said mr. woodhouse.
so prettily done justas your drawings always are my dear.
i do not know any body who drawsso well as you do.
the only thing i do not thoroughly like isthat she seems to be sitting out of doors with only a little shawlover her shouldersand it makes one think she must catch cold.but my dear papa it is supposed to be summer a warm day in summer.look at the tree.but it is never safe to sit out of doors my dear.you sir may say any thing cried mr. elton but i must confessthat i regard it as a most happy thought the placing of misssmith out of doors and the tree is touched with such inimitablespirit any other situation would have been much less in character.the naivete of miss smiths mannersand altogetheroh it ismost admirable i cannot keep my eyes from it.
i never saw sucha likeness.the next thing wanted was to get the picture framed and here were afew difficulties.
it must be done directly it must be done in londonthe order must go through the hands of some intelligent person whose tastecould be depended on and isabella the usual doer of all commissionsmust not be applied to because it was december and mr. woodhousecould not bear the idea of her stirring out of her house in the fogsof december.
but no sooner was the distress known to mr. eltonthan it was removed.
his gallantry was always on the alert.might he be trusted with the commission what infinite pleasureshould he have in executing it he could ride to london at any time.it was impossible to say how much he should be gratified by beingemployed on such an errand.he was too goodshe could not endure the thoughtshe wouldnot give him such a troublesome office for the worldbroughton the desired repetition of entreaties and assurancesanda very few minutes settled the business.mr.
elton was to take the drawing to london chuse the frameand give the directions and emma thought she could so pack itas to ensure its safety without much incommoding him while heseemed mostly fearful of not being incommoded enough.what a precious deposit said he with a tender sigh as hereceived it.this man is almost too gallant to be in love thought emma.i should say so but that i suppose there may be a hundred differentways of being in love.
he is an excellent young man and will suitharriet exactly it will be an exactly so as he says himselfbut he does sigh and languish and study for compliments rather morethan i could endure as a principal.
i come in for a pretty goodshare as a second.
but it is his gratitude on harriets account.chapter viithe very day of mr. eltons going to london produced a fresh occasionfor emmas services towards her friend.
harriet had been at hartfieldas usual soon after breakfast and after a time had gone hometo return again to dinner she returned and sooner than had beentalked of and with an agitated hurried look announcing somethingextraordinary to have happened which she was longing to tell.half a minute brought it all out.
she had heard as soon as she gotback to mrs. goddards that mr. martin had been there an hour beforeand finding she was not at home nor particularly expected had lefta little parcel for her from one of his sisters and gone awayand on opening this parcel she had actually found besides the twosongs which she had lent elizabeth to copy a letter to herselfand this letter was from him from mr. martin and contained a directproposal of marriage.
who could have thought it she was so surprizedshe did not know what to do.
yes quite a proposal of marriageand a very good letter at least she thought so.
and he wroteas if he really loved her very muchbut she did not knowand soshe was come as fast as she could to ask miss woodhouse what sheshould do.
emma was halfashamed of her friend for seeming sopleased and so doubtful.upon my word she cried the young man is determined not to loseany thing for want of asking.
he will connect himself well if he can.will you read the letter cried harriet.
pray do.
id ratheryou would.emma was not sorry to be pressed.
she read and was surprized.the style of the letter was much above her expectation.there were not merely no grammatical errors but as a composition itwould not have disgraced a gentleman the language though plainwas strong and unaffected and the sentiments it conveyed very muchto the credit of the writer.
it was short but expressed good sensewarm attachment liberality propriety even delicacy of feeling.she paused over it while harriet stood anxiously watching forher opinion with a well well and was at last forced to addis it a good letter or is it too shortyes indeed a very good letter replied emma rather slowlysogood a letter harriet that every thing considered i think one ofhis sisters must have helped him.
i can hardly imagine the youngman whom i saw talking with you the other day could express himselfso well if left quite to his own powers and yet it is not thestyle of a woman no certainly it is too strong and concisenot diffuse enough for a woman.
no doubt he is a sensible manand i suppose may have a natural talent forthinks strongly andclearlyand when he takes a pen in hand his thoughts naturally findproper words.
it is so with some men.
yes i understand the sortof mind.
vigorous decided with sentiments to a certain pointnot coarse.
a better written letter harriet returning itthan i had expected.well said the still waiting harrietwellandand whatshall i dowhat shall you do in what respect do you mean with regardto this letteryes.but what are you in doubt of you must answer it of courseand speedily.yes.
but what shall i say dear miss woodhouse do advise me.oh no no the letter had much better be all your own.
you willexpress yourself very properly i am sure.
there is no danger of yournot being intelligible which is the first thing.
your meaning mustbe unequivocal no doubts or demurs and such expressions of gratitudeand concern for the pain you are inflicting as propriety requireswill present themselves unbidden to your mind i am persuaded.you need not be prompted to write with the appearance of sorrowfor his disappointment.you think i ought to refuse him then said harriet looking down.ought to refuse him my dear harriet what do you mean are youin any doubt as to that i thoughtbut i beg your pardon perhaps ihave been under a mistake.
i certainly have been misunderstandingyou if you feel in doubt as to the purport of your answer.i had imagined you were consulting me only as to the wording of it.harriet was silent.
with a little reserve of manner emma continuedyou mean to return a favourable answer i collect.no i do not that is i do not meanwhat shall i do what wouldyou advise me to do pray dear miss woodhouse tell me what iought to do.i shall not give you any advice harriet.
i will have nothing todo with it.
this is a point which you must settle with your feelings.i had no notion that he liked me so very much said harrietcontemplating the letter.
for a little while emma perseveredin her silence but beginning to apprehend the bewitching flatteryof that letter might be too powerful she thought it best to sayi lay it down as a general rule harriet that if a woman doubtsas to whether she should accept a man or not she certainly oughtto refuse him.
if she can hesitate as to yes she ought to sayno directly.
it is not a state to be safely entered intowith doubtful feelings with half a heart.
i thought it my dutyas a friend and older than yourself to say thus much to you.but do not imagine that i want to influence you.oh no i am sure you are a great deal too kind tobut if youwould just advise me what i had best dono no i do not meanthatas you say ones mind ought to be quite made upone shouldnot be hesitatingit is a very serious thing.it will be saferto say no perhaps.do you think i had better say nonot for the world said emma smiling graciously would i adviseyou either way.
you must be the best judge of your own happiness.if you prefer mr. martin to every other person if you think himthe most agreeable man you have ever been in company with why shouldyou hesitate you blush harriet.does any body else occur to youat this moment under such a definition harriet harriet do notdeceive yourself do not be run away with by gratitude and compassion.at this moment whom are you thinking ofthe symptoms were favourable.instead of answering harriet turnedaway confused and stood thoughtfully by the fire and thoughthe letter was still in her hand it was now mechanically twistedabout without regard.
emma waited the result with impatiencebut not without strong hopes.
at last with some hesitationharriet saidmiss woodhouse as you will not give me your opinion i mustdo as well as i can by myself and i have now quite determinedand really almost made up my mindto refuse mr. martin.
do youthink i am rightperfectly perfectly right my dearest harriet you are doing justwhat you ought.
while you were at all in suspense i kept my feelingsto myself but now that you are so completely decided i have nohesitation in approving.
dear harriet i give myself joy of this.it would have grieved me to lose your acquaintance which must havebeen the consequence of your marrying mr. martin.
while you were inthe smallest degree wavering i said nothing about it because i wouldnot influence but it would have been the loss of a friend to me.i could not have visited mrs. robert martin of abbeymill farm.now i am secure of you for ever.harriet had not surmised her own danger but the idea of it struckher forcibly.you could not have visited me she cried looking aghast.no to be sure you could not but i never thought of that before.that would have been too dreadfulwhat an escapedear miss woodhousei would not give up the pleasure and honour of being intimate with youfor any thing in the world.indeed harriet it would have been a severe pang to lose youbut it must have been.
you would have thrown yourself out of allgood society.
i must have given you up.dear mehow should i ever have borne it it would have killedme never to come to hartfield any moredear affectionate creatureyou banished to abbeymill farmyouconfined to the society of the illiterate and vulgar all your lifei wonder how the young man could have the assurance to ask it.he must have a pretty good opinion of himself.i do not think he is conceited either in general said harriether conscience opposing such censure at least he is very good naturedand i shall always feel much obliged to him and have a great regardforbut that is quite a different thing fromand you knowthough he may like me it does not follow that i shouldandcertainly i must confess that since my visiting here i have seenpeopleand if one comes to compare them person and mannersthere is no comparison at all one is so very handsome and agreeable.however i do really think mr. martin a very amiable young manand have a great opinion of him and his being so much attachedto meand his writing such a letterbut as to leaving youit is what i would not do upon any consideration.thank you thank you my own sweet little friend.
we will notbe parted.
a woman is not to marry a man merely because she is askedor because he is attached to her and can write a tolerable letter.oh noand it is but a short letter too.emma felt the bad taste of her friend but let it pass with avery true and it would be a small consolation to her for theclownish manner which might be offending her every hour of the dayto know that her husband could write a good letter.oh yes very.
nobody cares for a letter the thing is to be alwayshappy with pleasant companions.
i am quite determined to refuse him.but how shall i do what shall i sayemma assured her there would be no difficulty in the answerand advised its being written directly which was agreed toin the hope of her assistance and though emma continued to protestagainst any assistance being wanted it was in fact given in theformation of every sentence.
the looking over his letter againin replying to it had such a softening tendency that it wasparticularly necessary to brace her up with a few decisive expressionsand she was so very much concerned at the idea of making him unhappyand thought so much of what his mother and sisters would think and sayand was so anxious that they should not fancy her ungratefulthat emma believed if the young man had come in her way at that momenthe would have been accepted after all.this letter however was written and sealed and sent.the business was finished and harriet safe.
she was rather lowall the evening but emma could allow for her amiable regretsand sometimes relieved them by speaking of her own affectionsometimes by bringing forward the idea of mr. elton.i shall never be invited to abbeymill again was said in rathera sorrowful tone.nor if you were could i ever bear to part with you my harriet.you are a great deal too necessary at hartfield to be sparedto abbeymill.and i am sure i should never want to go there for i am never happybut at hartfield.some time afterwards it was i think mrs. goddard would be verymuch surprized if she knew what had happened.
i am sure miss nashwouldfor miss nash thinks her own sister very well marriedand it is only a linendraper.one should be sorry to see greater pride or refinement in theteacher of a school harriet.
i dare say miss nash would envy yousuch an opportunity as this of being married.
even this conquestwould appear valuable in her eyes.
as to any thing superior for youi suppose she is quite in the dark.
the attentions of a certainperson can hardly be among the tittletattle of highbury yet.hitherto i fancy you and i are the only people to whom his looksand manners have explained themselves.harriet blushed and smiled and said something about wonderingthat people should like her so much.
the idea of mr. elton wascertainly cheering but still after a time she was tenderheartedagain towards the rejected mr. martin.now he has got my letter said she softly.
i wonder what theyare all doingwhether his sisters knowif he is unhappythey will be unhappy too.
i hope he will not mind it so very much.let us think of those among our absent friends who are morecheerfully employed cried emma.
at this moment perhaps mr. eltonis shewing your picture to his mother and sisters telling how muchmore beautiful is the original and after being asked for it fiveor six times allowing them to hear your name your own dear name.my picturebut he has left my picture in bondstreet.has he sothen i know nothing of mr. elton.
no my dearlittle modest harriet depend upon it the picture will not bein bondstreet till just before he mounts his horse tomorrow.it is his companion all this evening his solace his delight.it opens his designs to his family it introduces you among themit diffuses through the party those pleasantest feelings of our natureeager curiosity and warm prepossession.
how cheerful how animatedhow suspicious how busy their imaginations all areharriet smiled again and her smiles grew stronger.chapter viiiharriet slept at hartfield that night.
for some weeks past shehad been spending more than half her time there and graduallygetting to have a bedroom appropriated to herself and emmajudged it best in every respect safest and kindest to keep herwith them as much as possible just at present.
she was obligedto go the next morning for an hour or two to mrs. goddardsbut it was then to be settled that she should return to hartfieldto make a regular visit of some days.while she was gone mr. knightley called and sat some time withmr.
woodhouse and emma till mr. woodhouse who had previously made uphis mind to walk out was persuaded by his daughter not to defer itand was induced by the entreaties of both though against the scruplesof his own civility to leave mr. knightley for that purpose.mr.
knightley who had nothing of ceremony about him was offeringby his short decided answers an amusing contrast to the protractedapologies and civil hesitations of the other.well i believe if you will excuse me mr. knightley if youwill not consider me as doing a very rude thing i shall takeemmas advice and go out for a quarter of an hour.
as the sunis out i believe i had better take my three turns while i can.i treat you without ceremony mr. knightley.
we invalids think weare privileged people.my dear sir do not make a stranger of me.i leave an excellent substitute in my daughter.
emma will be happyto entertain you.
and therefore i think i will beg your excuseand take my three turnsmy winter walk.you cannot do better sir.i would ask for the pleasure of your company mr. knightleybut i am a very slow walker and my pace would be tedious to youand besides you have another long walk before you to donwell abbey.thank you sir thank you i am going this moment myself and ithink the sooner you go the better.
i will fetch your greatcoatand open the garden door for you.mr.
woodhouse at last was off but mr. knightley instead of beingimmediately off likewise sat down again seemingly inclinedfor more chat.
he began speaking of harriet and speakingof her with more voluntary praise than emma had ever heard before.i cannot rate her beauty as you do said he but she is apretty little creature and i am inclined to think very well ofher disposition.
her character depends upon those she is withbut in good hands she will turn out a valuable woman.i am glad you think so and the good hands i hope may not be wanting.come said he you are anxious for a compliment so i willtell you that you have improved her.
you have cured her of herschoolgirls giggle she really does you credit.thank you.
i should be mortified indeed if i did not believe ihad been of some use but it is not every body who will bestowpraise where they may.
you do not often overpower me with it.you are expecting her again you say this morningalmost every moment.
she has been gone longer already thanshe intended.something has happened to delay her some visitors perhaps.highbury gossipstiresome wretchesharriet may not consider every body tiresome that you would.emma knew this was too true for contradiction and thereforesaid nothing.
he presently added with a smilei do not pretend to fix on times or places but i must tell youthat i have good reason to believe your little friend will soonhear of something to her advantage.indeed how so of what sorta very serious sort i assure you still smiling.very serious i can think of but one thingwho is in lovewith her who makes you their confidantemma was more than half in hopes of mr. eltons having dropt a hint.mr.
knightley was a sort of general friend and adviser and she knewmr.
elton looked up to him.i have reason to think he replied that harriet smith willsoon have an offer of marriage and from a most unexceptionablequarterrobert martin is the man.
her visit to abbeymillthis summer seems to have done his business.
he is desperatelyin love and means to marry her.he is very obliging said emma but is he sure that harrietmeans to marry himwell well means to make her an offer then.
will that do he cameto the abbey two evenings ago on purpose to consult me about it.he knows i have a thorough regard for him and all his family andi believe considers me as one of his best friends.
he came to askme whether i thought it would be imprudent in him to settle so earlywhether i thought her too young in short whether i approved hischoice altogether having some apprehension perhaps of her beingconsidered especially since your making so much of her as in a lineof society above him.
i was very much pleased with all that he said.i never hear better sense from any one than robert martin.he always speaks to the purpose open straightforward and verywell judging.
he told me every thing his circumstances and plansand what they all proposed doing in the event of his marriage.
he isan excellent young man both as son and brother.
i had no hesitationin advising him to marry.
he proved to me that he could afford itand that being the case i was convinced he could not do better.i praised the fair lady too and altogether sent him away very happy.if he had never esteemed my opinion before he would have thoughthighly of me then and i dare say left the house thinking me thebest friend and counsellor man ever had.
this happened the nightbefore last.
now as we may fairly suppose he would not allowmuch time to pass before he spoke to the lady and as he does notappear to have spoken yesterday it is not unlikely that he shouldbe at mrs. goddards today and she may be detained by a visitorwithout thinking him at all a tiresome wretch.pray mr. knightley said emma who had been smiling to herselfthrough a great part of this speech how do you know that mr. martindid not speak yesterdaycertainly replied he surprized i do not absolutely know itbut it may be inferred.
was not she the whole day with youcome said she i will tell you something in return for whatyou have told me.
he did speak yesterdaythat is he wroteand was refused.this was obliged to be repeated before it could be believedand mr. knightley actually looked red with surprize and displeasureas he stood up in tall indignation and saidthen she is a greater simpleton than i ever believed her.what is the foolish girl aboutoh to be sure cried emma it is always incomprehensibleto a man that a woman should ever refuse an offer of marriage.a man always imagines a woman to be ready for any body who asks her.nonsense a man does not imagine any such thing.
but what isthe meaning of this harriet smith refuse robert martin madnessif it is so but i hope you are mistaken.i saw her answernothing could be clearer.you saw her answeryou wrote her answer too.
emma this isyour doing.
you persuaded her to refuse him.and if i did which however i am far from allowing i shouldnot feel that i had done wrong.
mr. martin is a very respectableyoung man but i cannot admit him to be harriets equal and amrather surprized indeed that he should have ventured to address her.by your account he does seem to have had some scruples.
it isa pity that they were ever got over.not harriets equal exclaimed mr. knightley loudly and warmlyand with calmer asperity added a few moments afterwards no heis not her equal indeed for he is as much her superior in senseas in situation.
emma your infatuation about that girl blinds you.what are harriet smiths claims either of birth nature or educationto any connexion higher than robert martin she is the naturaldaughter of nobody knows whom with probably no settled provisionat all and certainly no respectable relations.
she is known onlyas parlourboarder at a common school.
she is not a sensible girlnor a girl of any information.
she has been taught nothing usefuland is too young and too simple to have acquired any thing herself.at her age she can have no experience and with her little witis not very likely ever to have any that can avail her.she is pretty and she is good tempered and that is all.my only scruple in advising the match was on his account as beingbeneath his deserts and a bad connexion for him.
i felt thatas to fortune in all probability he might do much better and that asto a rational companion or useful helpmate he could not do worse.but i could not reason so to a man in love and was willingto trust to there being no harm in her to her having that sortof disposition which in good hands like his might be easily ledaright and turn out very well.
the advantage of the match i feltto be all on her side and had not the smallest doubt nor have i nowthat there would be a general cryout upon her extreme good luck.even your satisfaction i made sure of.
it crossed my mind immediatelythat you would not regret your friends leaving highbury for thesake of her being settled so well.
i remember saying to myselfeven emma with all her partiality for harriet will think this agood match.i cannot help wondering at your knowing so little of emma as to sayany such thing.
what think a farmer and with all his sense and allhis merit mr. martin is nothing more a good match for my intimatefriend not regret her leaving highbury for the sake of marryinga man whom i could never admit as an acquaintance of my own iwonder you should think it possible for me to have such feelings.i assure you mine are very different.
i must think your statementby no means fair.
you are not just to harriets claims.they would be estimated very differently by others as well as myselfmr.
martin may be the richest of the two but he is undoubtedlyher inferior as to rank in society.the sphere in which she movesis much above his.it would be a degradation.a degradation to illegitimacy and ignorance to be marriedto a respectable intelligent gentlemanfarmeras to the circumstances of her birth though in a legal senseshe may be called nobody it will not hold in common sense.she is not to pay for the offence of others by being held belowthe level of those with whom she is brought up.there can scarcelybe a doubt that her father is a gentlemanand a gentleman offortune.her allowance is very liberal nothing has ever been grudgedfor her improvement or comfort.that she is a gentlemans daughteris indubitable to me that she associates with gentlemens daughtersno one i apprehend will deny.she is superior to mr. robert martin.whoever might be her parents said mr. knightley whoever mayhave had the charge of her it does not appear to have been any partof their plan to introduce her into what you would call good society.after receiving a very indifferent education she is left inmrs.
goddards hands to shift as she canto move in shortin mrs. goddards line to have mrs. goddards acquaintance.her friends evidently thought this good enough for her and it wasgood enough.
she desired nothing better herself.
till you choseto turn her into a friend her mind had no distaste for her own setnor any ambition beyond it.
she was as happy as possible with themartins in the summer.
she had no sense of superiority then.if she has it now you have given it.
you have been no friend toharriet smith emma.
robert martin would never have proceeded so farif he had not felt persuaded of her not being disinclined to him.i know him well.
he has too much real feeling to address anywoman on the haphazard of selfish passion.
and as to conceithe is the farthest from it of any man i know.
depend upon it hehad encouragement.it was most convenient to emma not to make a direct reply to thisassertion she chose rather to take up her own line of the subject again.you are a very warm friend to mr. martin but as i said beforeare unjust to harriet.
harriets claims to marry well are notso contemptible as you represent them.
she is not a clever girlbut she has better sense than you are aware of and does notdeserve to have her understanding spoken of so slightingly.waiving that point however and supposing her to be as youdescribe her only pretty and goodnatured let me tell you that inthe degree she possesses them they are not trivial recommendationsto the world in general for she is in fact a beautiful girland must be thought so by ninetynine people out of an hundredand till it appears that men are much more philosophic on the subjectof beauty than they are generally supposed till they do fallin love with wellinformed minds instead of handsome faces a girlwith such loveliness as harriet has a certainty of being admiredand sought after of having the power of chusing from among manyconsequently a claim to be nice.
her goodnature too is not so veryslight a claim comprehending as it does real thorough sweetnessof temper and manner a very humble opinion of herself and a greatreadiness to be pleased with other people.
i am very much mistakenif your sex in general would not think such beauty and such temperthe highest claims a woman could possess.upon my word emma to hear you abusing the reason you haveis almost enough to make me think so too.
better be without sensethan misapply it as you do.to be sure cried she playfully.
i know that is the feelingof you all.
i know that such a girl as harriet is exactlywhat every man delights inwhat at once bewitches his sensesand satisfies his judgment.
oh harriet may pick and chuse.were you yourself ever to marry she is the very woman for you.and is she at seventeen just entering into life just beginningto be known to be wondered at because she does not accept the firstoffer she receives nopray let her have time to look about her.i have always thought it a very foolish intimacy said mr. knightleypresently though i have kept my thoughts to myself but i nowperceive that it will be a very unfortunate one for harriet.you will puff her up with such ideas of her own beauty and of whatshe has a claim to that in a little while nobody within herreach will be good enough for her.
vanity working on a weak headproduces every sort of mischief.
nothing so easy as for a young ladyto raise her expectations too high.
miss harriet smith may not findoffers of marriage flow in so fast though she is a very pretty girl.men of sense whatever you may chuse to say do not want silly wives.men of family would not be very fond of connecting themselveswith a girl of such obscurityand most prudent men would beafraid of the inconvenience and disgrace they might be involved inwhen the mystery of her parentage came to be revealed.
let her marryrobert martin and she is safe respectable and happy for everbut if you encourage her to expect to marry greatly and teachher to be satisfied with nothing less than a man of consequenceand large fortune she may be a parlourboarder at mrs. goddardsall the rest of her lifeor at least for harriet smith is agirl who will marry somebody or other till she grow desperateand is glad to catch at the old writingmasters son.we think so very differently on this point mr. knightleythat there can be no use in canvassing it.
we shall only be makingeach other more angry.
but as to my letting her marry robert martinit is impossible she has refused him and so decidedly i thinkas must prevent any second application.
she must abide by the evilof having refused him whatever it may be and as to the refusal itselfi will not pretend to say that i might not influence her a littlebut i assure you there was very little for me or for any body to do.his appearance is so much against him and his manner so badthat if she ever were disposed to favour him she is not now.i can imagine that before she had seen any body superiorshe might tolerate him.
he was the brother of her friendsand he took pains to please her and altogether having seennobody better that must have been his great assistantshe might not while she was at abbeymill find him disagreeable.but the case is altered now.
she knows now what gentlemen areand nothing but a gentleman in education and manner has any chancewith harriet.nonsense errant nonsense as ever was talked cried mr. knightley.robertmartins manners have sense sincerity and goodhumour to recommendthem and his mind has more true gentility than harriet smith could understand.emma made no answer and tried to look cheerfully unconcerned but wasreally feeling uncomfortable and wanting him very much to be gone.she did not repent what she had done she still thought herselfa better judge of such a point of female right and refinement than hecould be but yet she had a sort of habitual respect for his judgmentin general which made her dislike having it so loudly against herand to have him sitting just opposite to her in angry statewas very disagreeable.
some minutes passed in this unpleasant silencewith only one attempt on emmas side to talk of the weatherbut he made no answer.
he was thinking.
the result of his thoughtsappeared at last in these words.robert martin has no great lossif he can but think so and ihope it will not be long before he does.
your views for harrietare best known to yourself but as you make no secret of your loveof matchmaking it is fair to suppose that views and plansand projects you haveand as a friend i shall just hint to youthat if elton is the man i think it will be all labour in vain.emma laughed and disclaimed.
he continueddepend upon it elton will not do.
elton is a very good sort of manand a very respectable vicar of highbury but not at all likelyto make an imprudent match.
he knows the value of a good incomeas well as any body.
elton may talk sentimentally but he willact rationally.
he is as well acquainted with his own claims as youcan be with harriets.
he knows that he is a very handsome young manand a great favourite wherever he goes and from his general wayof talking in unreserved moments when there are only men presenti am convinced that he does not mean to throw himself away.i have heard him speak with great animation of a large familyof young ladies that his sisters are intimate with who have alltwenty thousand pounds apiece.i am very much obliged to you said emma laughing again.if i had set my heart on mr. eltons marrying harriet it wouldhave been very kind to open my eyes but at present i only wantto keep harriet to myself.
i have done with matchmaking indeed.i could never hope to equal my own doings at randalls.
i shall leaveoff while i am well.good morning to yousaid he rising and walking off abruptly.he was very much vexed.
he felt the disappointment of the young manand was mortified to have been the means of promoting it by thesanction he had given and the part which he was persuaded emma hadtaken in the affair was provoking him exceedingly.emma remained in a state of vexation too but there was moreindistinctness in the causes of hers than in his.
she did not alwaysfeel so absolutely satisfied with herself so entirely convinced thather opinions were right and her adversarys wrong as mr. knightley.he walked off in more complete selfapprobation than he left for her.she was not so materially cast down however but that a littletime and the return of harriet were very adequate restoratives.harriets staying away so long was beginning to make her uneasy.the possibility of the young mans coming to mrs. goddardsthat morning and meeting with harriet and pleading his own causegave alarming ideas.
the dread of such a failure after all became theprominent uneasiness and when harriet appeared and in very good spiritsand without having any such reason to give for her long absenceshe felt a satisfaction which settled her with her own mindand convinced her that let mr. knightley think or say what he wouldshe had done nothing which womans friendship and womans feelingswould not justify.he had frightened her a little about mr. elton but when she consideredthat mr. knightley could not have observed him as she had doneneither with the interest nor she must be allowed to tell herselfin spite of mr. knightleys pretensions with the skill of suchan observer on such a question as herself that he had spoken ithastily and in anger she was able to believe that he had rathersaid what he wished resentfully to be true than what he knewany thing about.
he certainly might have heard mr. elton speakwith more unreserve than she had ever done and mr. elton might notbe of an imprudent inconsiderate disposition as to money mattershe might naturally be rather attentive than otherwise to thembut then mr. knightley did not make due allowance for the influenceof a strong passion at war with all interested motives.
mr. knightleysaw no such passion and of course thought nothing of its effectsbut she saw too much of it to feel a doubt of its overcoming anyhesitations that a reasonable prudence might originally suggestand more than a reasonable becoming degree of prudence she was verysure did not belong to mr. elton.harriets cheerful look and manner established hers she came backnot to think of mr. martin but to talk of mr. elton.
miss nashhad been telling her something which she repeated immediatelywith great delight.
mr. perry had been to mrs. goddards to attenda sick child and miss nash had seen him and he had told miss nashthat as he was coming back yesterday from clayton park he had metmr.
elton and found to his great surprize that mr. elton wasactually on his road to london and not meaning to return tillthe morrow though it was the whistclub night which he had beennever known to miss before and mr. perry had remonstrated with himabout it and told him how shabby it was in him their best playerto absent himself and tried very much to persuade him to put offhis journey only one day but it would not do mr. elton had beendetermined to go on and had said in a very particular way indeedthat he was going on business which he would not put off for anyinducement in the world and something about a very enviable commissionand being the bearer of something exceedingly precious.
mr. perrycould not quite understand him but he was very sure there mustbe a lady in the case and he told him so and mr. elton onlylooked very conscious and smiling and rode off in great spirits.miss nash had told her all this and had talked a great deal moreabout mr. elton and said looking so very significantly at herthat she did not pretend to understand what his business might bebut she only knew that any woman whom mr. elton could prefershe should think the luckiest woman in the world for beyond a doubtmr.
elton had not his equal for beauty or agreeableness.chapter ixmr.
knightley might quarrel with her but emma could not quarrelwith herself.
he was so much displeased that it was longer thanusual before he came to hartfield again and when they did meethis grave looks shewed that she was not forgiven.
she was sorrybut could not repent.
on the contrary her plans and proceedingswere more and more justified and endeared to her by the generalappearances of the next few days.the picture elegantly framed came safely to hand soon aftermr.
eltons return and being hung over the mantelpiece of the commonsittingroom he got up to look at it and sighed out his half sentencesof admiration just as he ought and as for harriets feelings they werevisibly forming themselves into as strong and steady an attachmentas her youth and sort of mind admitted.
emma was soon perfectlysatisfied of mr. martins being no otherwise remembered than ashe furnished a contrast with mr. elton of the utmost advantage to the latter.her views of improving her little friends mind by a great dealof useful reading and conversation had never yet led to more thana few first chapters and the intention of going on tomorrow.it was much easier to chat than to study much pleasanter to lether imagination range and work at harriets fortune than to belabouring to enlarge her comprehension or exercise it on sober factsand the only literary pursuit which engaged harriet at presentthe only mental provision she was making for the evening of lifewas the collecting and transcribing all the riddles of every sortthat she could meet with into a thin quarto of hotpressed papermade up by her friend and ornamented with ciphers and trophies.in this age of literature such collections on a very grand scaleare not uncommon.
miss nash headteacher at mrs. goddardshad written out at least three hundred and harriet who had takenthe first hint of it from her hoped with miss woodhouses helpto get a great many more.
emma assisted with her inventionmemory and taste and as harriet wrote a very pretty handit was likely to be an arrangement of the first order in formas well as quantity.mr.
woodhouse was almost as much interested in the business as the girlsand tried very often to recollect something worth their putting in.so many clever riddles as there used to be when he was younghewondered he could not remember them but he hoped he should in time.and it always ended in kitty a fair but frozen maid.his good friend perry too whom he had spoken to on the subjectdid not at present recollect any thing of the riddle kindbut he had desired perry to be upon the watch and as he went aboutso much something he thought might come from that quarter.it was by no means his daughters wish that the intellects ofhighbury in general should be put under requisition.
mr. eltonwas the only one whose assistance she asked.
he was invitedto contribute any really good enigmas charades or conundrumsthat he might recollect and she had the pleasure of seeing himmost intently at work with his recollections and at the same timeas she could perceive most earnestly careful that nothing ungallantnothing that did not breathe a compliment to the sex should passhis lips.
they owed to him their two or three politest puzzlesand the joy and exultation with which at last he recalledand rather sentimentally recited that wellknown charade    my first doth affliction denote      which my second is destind to feel    and my whole is the best antidote      that affliction to soften and heal.made her quite sorry to acknowledge that they had transcribed itsome pages ago already.why will not you write one yourself for us mr. elton said shethat is the only security for its freshness and nothing could beeasier to you.oh no he had never written hardly ever any thing of the kindin his life.
the stupidest fellow he was afraid not even misswoodhousehe stopt a momentor miss smith could inspire him.the very next day however produced some proof of inspiration.he called for a few moments just to leave a piece of paper on thetable containing as he said a charade which a friend of his hadaddressed to a young lady the object of his admiration but whichfrom his manner emma was immediately convinced must be his own.i do not offer it for miss smiths collection said he.being my friends i have no right to expose it in any degreeto the public eye but perhaps you may not dislike looking at it.the speech was more to emma than to harriet which emmacould understand.
there was deep consciousness about himand he found it easier to meet her eye than her friends.he was gone the next momentafter another moments pausetake it said emma smiling and pushing the paper towardsharrietit is for you.
take your own.but harriet was in a tremor and could not touch it and emmanever loth to be first was obliged to examine it herself.
to miss          charade.
my first displays the wealth and pomp of kings      lords of the earth their luxury and ease.
another view of man my second brings      behold him there the monarch of the seas    but ah united what reverse we have      mans boasted power and freedom all are flown    lord of the earth and sea he bends a slave      and woman lovely woman reigns alone.
thy ready wit the word will soon supply      may its approval beam in that soft eyeshe cast her eye over it pondered caught the meaning read it throughagain to be quite certain and quite mistress of the lines and thenpassing it to harriet sat happily smiling and saying to herselfwhile harriet was puzzling over the paper in all the confusionof hope and dulness very well mr. elton very well indeed.i have read worse charades.
courtshipa very good hint.
i giveyou credit for it.
this is feeling your way.
this is saying veryplainlypray miss smith give me leave to pay my addresses to you.approve my charade and my intentions in the same glance.
may its approval beam in that soft eyeharriet exactly.
soft is the very word for her eyeof all epithetsthe justest that could be given.
thy ready wit the word will soon supply.humphharriets ready wit all the better.
a man must be very muchin love indeed to describe her so.
ah mr. knightley i wishyou had the benefit of this i think this would convince you.for once in your life you would be obliged to own yourself mistaken.an excellent charade indeed and very much to the purpose.things must come to a crisis soon now.she was obliged to break off from these very pleasant observationswhich were otherwise of a sort to run into great length by theeagerness of harriets wondering questions.what can it be miss woodhousewhat can it be i have not an ideaicannot guess it in the least.
what can it possibly be do tryto find it out miss woodhouse.
do help me.
i never saw any thingso hard.
is it kingdom i wonder who the friend wasand who couldbe the young lady.
do you think it is a good one can it be woman      and woman lovely woman reigns alone.can it be neptune      behold him there the monarch of the seasor a trident or a mermaid or a shark oh no shark is onlyone syllable.
it must be very clever or he would not have brought it.oh miss woodhouse do you think we shall ever find it outmermaids and sharks nonsense my dear harriet what are youthinking of where would be the use of his bringing us a charade madeby a friend upon a mermaid or a shark give me the paper and listen.for miss  read miss smith.
my first displays the wealth and pomp of kings      lords of the earth their luxury and ease.that is court.
another view of man my second brings      behold him there the monarch of the seasthat is shipplain as it can be.now for the cream.
but ah united courtship you know what reverse we have      mans boasted power and freedom all are flown.
lord of the earth and sea he bends a slave      and woman lovely woman reigns alone.a very proper complimentand then follows the applicationwhich i think my dear harriet you cannot find much difficultyin comprehending.
read it in comfort to yourself.
there canbe no doubt of its being written for you and to you.harriet could not long resist so delightful a persuasion.she read the concluding lines and was all flutter and happiness.she could not speak.
but she was not wanted to speak.
it was enoughfor her to feel.
emma spoke for her.there is so pointed and so particular a meaning in this complimentsaid she that i cannot have a doubt as to mr. eltons intentions.you are his objectand you will soon receive the completest proofof it.
i thought it must be so.
i thought i could not be so deceivedbut now it is clear the state of his mind is as clear and decidedas my wishes on the subject have been ever since i knew you.yes harriet just so long have i been wanting the very circumstanceto happen what has happened.
i could never tell whether an attachmentbetween you and mr. elton were most desirable or most natural.its probability and its eligibility have really so equalled eachother i am very happy.
i congratulate you my dear harriet with allmy heart.
this is an attachment which a woman may well feel pridein creating.
this is a connexion which offers nothing but good.it will give you every thing that you wantconsideration independencea proper homeit will fix you in the centre of all your real friendsclose to hartfield and to me and confirm our intimacy for ever.this harriet is an alliance which can never raise a blush in eitherof us.dear miss woodhouseand dear miss woodhouse was all that harrietwith many tender embraces could articulate at first but when theydid arrive at something more like conversation it was sufficientlyclear to her friend that she saw felt anticipated and rememberedjust as she ought.
mr. eltons superiority had very ample acknowledgment.whatever you say is always right cried harriet and thereforei suppose and believe and hope it must be so but otherwise i couldnot have imagined it.
it is so much beyond any thing i deserve.mr.
elton who might marry any body there cannot be two opinionsabout him.
he is so very superior.
only think of those sweetversesto miss .
dear me how clevercould it reallybe meant for mei cannot make a question or listen to a question about that.it is a certainty.
receive it on my judgment.
it is a sortof prologue to the play a motto to the chapter and will be soonfollowed by matteroffact prose.it is a sort of thing which nobody could have expected.
i am surea month ago i had no more idea myselfthe strangest things dotake placewhen miss smiths and mr. eltons get acquaintedthey do indeedandreally it is strange it is out of the common course that what isso evidently so palpably desirablewhat courts the prearrangementof other people should so immediately shape itself into the proper form.you and mr. elton are by situation called together you belongto one another by every circumstance of your respective homes.your marrying will be equal to the match at randalls.
there doesseem to be a something in the air of hartfield which gives loveexactly the right direction and sends it into the very channelwhere it ought to flow.
the course of true love never did run smootha hartfield edition of shakespeare would have a long note on that passage.that mr. elton should really be in love with meme of all peoplewho did not know him to speak to him at michaelmas and hethe very handsomest man that ever was and a man that every bodylooks up to quite like mr. knightley his company so sought afterthat every body says he need not eat a single meal by himself if hedoes not chuse it that he has more invitations than there are daysin the week.
and so excellent in the church miss nash has put downall the texts he has ever preached from since he came to highbury.dear me when i look back to the first time i saw him how littledid i thinkthe two abbots and i ran into the front room andpeeped through the blind when we heard he was going by and missnash came and scolded us away and staid to look through herselfhowever she called me back presently and let me look toowhich was very goodnatured.
and how beautiful we thought he lookedhe was arminarm with mr. cole.this is an alliance which whoeverwhatever your friends may bemust be agreeable to them provided at least they have common senseand we are not to be addressing our conduct to fools.
if theyare anxious to see you happily married here is a man whose amiablecharacter gives every assurance of itif they wish to have yousettled in the same country and circle which they have chosento place you in here it will be accomplished and if their onlyobject is that you should in the common phrase be well marriedhere is the comfortable fortune the respectable establishmentthe rise in the world which must satisfy them.yes very true.
how nicely you talk i love to hear you.you understand every thing.
you and mr. elton are one as cleveras the other.
this charadeif i had studied a twelvemonthi could never have made any thing like it.i thought he meant to try his skill by his manner of decliningit yesterday.i do think it is without exception the best charade i ever read.i never read one more to the purpose certainly.it is as long again as almost all we have had before.i do not consider its length as particularly in its favour.such things in general cannot be too short.harriet was too intent on the lines to hear.
the most satisfactorycomparisons were rising in her mind.it is one thing said she presentlyher cheeks in a glowtohave very good sense in a common way like every body elseand if there is any thing to say to sit down and write a letterand say just what you must in a short way and another to writeverses and charades like this.emma could not have desired a more spirited rejection of mr. martins prose.such sweet lines continued harrietthese two lastbuthow shall i ever be able to return the paper or say i have foundit outoh miss woodhouse what can we do about thatleave it to me.
you do nothing.
he will be here this eveningi dare say and then i will give it him back and some nonsenseor other will pass between us and you shall not be committed.yoursoft eyes shall chuse their own time for beaming.
trust to me.oh miss woodhouse what a pity that i must not write this beautifulcharade into my book i am sure i have not got one half so good.leave out the two last lines and there is no reason why youshould not write it into your book.oh but those two lines arethe best of all.
grantedfor private enjoyment and for privateenjoyment keep them.
they are not at all the less written you knowbecause you divide them.
the couplet does not cease to be nor doesits meaning change.
but take it away and all appropriation ceasesand a very pretty gallant charade remains fit for any collection.depend upon it he would not like to have his charade slightedmuch better than his passion.
a poet in love must be encouraged inboth capacities or neither.
give me the book i will write it downand then there can be no possible reflection on you.harriet submitted though her mind could hardly separate the partsso as to feel quite sure that her friend were not writing downa declaration of love.
it seemed too precious an offering for anydegree of publicity.i shall never let that book go out of my own hands said she.very well replied emma a most natural feeling and the longerit lasts the better i shall be pleased.
but here is my fathercoming you will not object to my reading the charade to him.it will be giving him so much pleasure he loves any thing ofthe sort and especially any thing that pays woman a compliment.he has the tenderest spirit of gallantry towards us allyou mustlet me read it to him.harriet looked grave.my dear harriet you must not refine too much upon thischarade.you will betray your feelings improperly if you aretoo conscious and too quick and appear to affix more meaningor even quite all the meaning which may be affixed to it.do not be overpowered by such a little tribute of admiration.if he had been anxious for secrecy he would not have left the paperwhile i was by but he rather pushed it towards me than towards you.do not let us be too solemn on the business.
he has encouragementenough to proceed without our sighing out our souls over this charade.oh noi hope i shall not be ridiculous about it.
do as you please.mr.
woodhouse came in and very soon led to the subject againby the recurrence of his very frequent inquiry of well my dearshow does your book go onhave you got any thing freshyes papa we have something to read you something quite fresh.a piece of paper was found on the table this morningdroptwe suppose by a fairycontaining a very pretty charade and wehave just copied it in.she read it to him just as he liked to have any thing readslowly and distinctly and two or three times over with explanationsof every part as she proceededand he was very much pleased andas she had foreseen especially struck with the complimentary conclusion.aye thats very just indeed thats very properly said.very true.
woman lovely woman.
it is such a pretty charademy dear that i can easily guess what fairy brought it.nobodycould have written so prettily but you emma.emma only nodded and smiled.after a little thinkingand a very tender sigh he addedah it is no difficulty to see who you take after your dear motherwas so clever at all those things if i had but her memory but ican remember nothingnot even that particular riddle which youhave heard me mention i can only recollect the first stanzaand there are several.
kitty a fair but frozen maid      kindled a flame i yet deplore    the hoodwinkd boy i called to aid    though of his near approach afraid      so fatal to my suit before.and that is all that i can recollect of itbut it is very cleverall the way through.
but i think my dear you said you had got it.yes papa it is written out in our second page.
we copied itfrom the elegant extracts.
it was garricks you know.aye very true.i wish i could recollect more of it.
kitty a fair but frozen maid.the name makes me think of poor isabella for she was very nearbeing christened catherine after her grandmama.
i hope we shallhave her here next week.
have you thought my dear where youshall put herand what room there will be for the childrenoh yesshe will have her own room of course the room she alwayshasand there is the nursery for the childrenjust as usualyou know.
why should there be any changei do not know my dearbut it is so long since she was herenotsince last easter and then only for a few days.mr.
john knightleysbeing a lawyer is very inconvenient.poor isabellashe is sadlytaken away from us alland how sorry she will be when she comesnot to see miss taylor hereshe will not be surprized papa at least.i do not know my dear.
i am sure i was very much surprizedwhen i first heard she was going to be married.we must ask mr. and mrs. weston to dine with us while isabellais here.yes my dear if there is time.butin a very depressed tonesheis coming for only one week.
there will not be time for any thing.it is unfortunate that they cannot stay longerbut it seems a caseof necessity.
mr. john knightley must be in town again on the thand we ought to be thankful papa that we are to have the wholeof the time they can give to the country that two or three daysare not to be taken out for the abbey.
mr. knightley promisesto give up his claim this christmasthough you know it is longersince they were with him than with us.it would be very hard indeed my dear if poor isabella wereto be anywhere but at hartfield.mr.
woodhouse could never allow for mr. knightleys claims onhis brother or any bodys claims on isabella except his own.he sat musing a little while and then saidbut i do not see why poor isabella should be obliged to go backso soon though he does.
i think emma i shall try and persuadeher to stay longer with us.
she and the children might stay very well.ah papathat is what you never have been able to accomplishand i do not think you ever will.
isabella cannot bear to staybehind her husband.this was too true for contradiction.
unwelcome as it was mr. woodhousecould only give a submissive sigh and as emma saw his spiritsaffected by the idea of his daughters attachment to her husbandshe immediately led to such a branch of the subject as must raise them.harriet must give us as much of her company as she can whilemy brother and sister are here.
i am sure she will be pleasedwith the children.
we are very proud of the children are not wepapa i wonder which she will think the handsomest henry or johnaye i wonder which she will.
poor little dears how glad theywill be to come.
they are very fond of being at hartfield harriet.i dare say they are sir.
i am sure i do not know who is not.henry is a fine boy but john is very like his mama.
henry is the eldesthe was named after me not after his father.
john the secondis named after his father.
some people are surprized i believethat the eldest was not but isabella would have him called henrywhich i thought very pretty of her.
and he is a very clever boyindeed.
they are all remarkably clever and they have so manypretty ways.
they will come and stand by my chair and saygrandpapa can you give me a bit of string and once henry asked mefor a knife but i told him knives were only made for grandpapas.i think their father is too rough with them very often.he appears rough to you said emma because you are so verygentle yourself but if you could compare him with other papasyou would not think him rough.
he wishes his boys to be active and hardyand if they misbehave can give them a sharp word now and thenbut he is an affectionate fathercertainly mr. john knightleyis an affectionate father.
the children are all fond of him.and then their uncle comes in and tosses them up to the ceilingin a very frightful waybut they like it papa there is nothing they like so much.it is such enjoyment to them that if their uncle did not lay downthe rule of their taking turns whichever began would never give wayto the other.well i cannot understand it.that is the case with us all papa.
one half of the world cannotunderstand the pleasures of the other.later in the morning and just as the girls were going to separatein preparation for the regular four oclock dinner the heroof this inimitable charade walked in again.
harriet turned awaybut emma could receive him with the usual smile and her quick eyesoon discerned in his the consciousness of having made a pushofhaving thrown a die and she imagined he was come to see how itmight turn up.
his ostensible reason however was to ask whethermr.
woodhouses party could be made up in the evening without himor whether he should be in the smallest degree necessary at hartfield.if he were every thing else must give way but otherwise his friendcole had been saying so much about his dining with himhad madesuch a point of it that he had promised him conditionally to come.emma thanked him but could not allow of his disappointing hisfriend on their account her father was sure of his rubber.he reurgedshe redeclined and he seemed then about to makehis bow when taking the paper from the table she returned itoh here is the charade you were so obliging as to leave with usthank you for the sight of it.
we admired it so much that i haveventured to write it into miss smiths collection.
your friendwill not take it amiss i hope.
of course i have not transcribedbeyond the first eight lines.mr.
elton certainly did not very well know what to say.he looked rather doubtinglyrather confused said something abouthonourglanced at emma and at harriet and then seeing the bookopen on the table took it up and examined it very attentively.with the view of passing off an awkward moment emma smilingly saidyou must make my apologies to your friend but so good a charademust not be confined to one or two.
he may be sure of every womansapprobation while he writes with such gallantry.i have no hesitation in saying replied mr. elton though hesitatinga good deal while he spoke i have no hesitation in sayingatleast if my friend feels at all as i doi have not the smallestdoubt that could he see his little effusion honoured as i see itlooking at the book again and replacing it on the table hewould consider it as the proudest moment of his life.after this speech he was gone as soon as possible.
emma could notthink it too soon for with all his good and agreeable qualitiesthere was a sort of parade in his speeches which was very aptto incline her to laugh.
she ran away to indulge the inclinationleaving the tender and the sublime of pleasure to harriets share.chapter xthough now the middle of december there had yet been no weatherto prevent the young ladies from tolerably regular exerciseand on the morrow emma had a charitable visit to pay to a poorsick family who lived a little way out of highbury.their road to this detached cottage was down vicarage lane a laneleading at right angles from the broad though irregular main streetof the place and as may be inferred containing the blessed abodeof mr. elton.
a few inferior dwellings were first to be passedand then about a quarter of a mile down the lane rose the vicaragean old and not very good house almost as close to the road as itcould be.
it had no advantage of situation but had been very muchsmartened up by the present proprietor and such as it wasthere could be no possibility of the two friends passing it withouta slackened pace and observing eyes.emmas remark wasthere it is.
there go you and your riddlebook one of these days.harriets wasoh what a sweet househow very beautifulthere are the yellowcurtains that miss nash admires so much.i do not often walk this way now said emma as they proceededbut then there will be an inducement and i shall gradually getintimately acquainted with all the hedges gates pools and pollardsof this part of highbury.harriet she found had never in her life been within side the vicarageand her curiosity to see it was so extreme that considering exteriorsand probabilities emma could only class it as a proof of lovewith mr. eltons seeing ready wit in her.i wish we could contrive it said she but i cannot thinkof any tolerable pretence for going inno servant that i wantto inquire about of his housekeeperno message from my father.she pondered but could think of nothing.
after a mutual silenceof some minutes harriet thus began againi do so wonder miss woodhouse that you should not be marriedor going to be married so charming as you areemma laughed and repliedmy being charming harriet is not quite enough to induce me to marryi must find other people charmingone other person at least.and i am not only not going to be married at present but havevery little intention of ever marrying at all.ahso you say but i cannot believe it.i must see somebody very superior to any one i have seen yetto be tempted mr. elton you know recollecting herselfis out of the question  and i do not wish to see any such person.i would rather not be tempted.
i cannot really change for the better.if i were to marry i must expect to repent it.dear meit is so odd to hear a woman talk soi have none of the usual inducements of women to marry.were i to fall in love indeed it would be a different thingbut i never have been in love it is not my way or my natureand i do not think i ever shall.
and without love i am sure ishould be a fool to change such a situation as mine.
fortune ido not want employment i do not want consequence i do not wanti believe few married women are half as much mistress of theirhusbands house as i am of hartfield and never never could i expectto be so truly beloved and important so always first and alwaysright in any mans eyes as i am in my fathers.but then to be an old maid at last like miss batesthat is as formidable an image as you could present harriet and if ithought i should ever be like miss bates so sillyso satisfiedso smilingso prosingso undistinguishing and unfastidiousand so apt to tell every thing relative to every body about mei would marry tomorrow.
but between us i am convinced there nevercan be any likeness except in being unmarried.but still you will be an old maid and thats so dreadfulnever mind harriet i shall not be a poor old maid and it ispoverty only which makes celibacy contemptible to a generous publica single woman with a very narrow income must be a ridiculousdisagreeable old maid the proper sport of boys and girlsbut a single woman of good fortune is always respectableand may be as sensible and pleasant as any body else.
and thedistinction is not quite so much against the candour and commonsense of the world as appears at first for a very narrow incomehas a tendency to contract the mind and sour the temper.those who can barely live and who live perforce in a very smalland generally very inferior society may well be illiberal and cross.this does not apply however to miss bates she is only too goodnatured and too silly to suit me but in general she is verymuch to the taste of every body though single and though poor.poverty certainly has not contracted her mind  i really believeif she had only a shilling in the world she would be very likelyto give away sixpence of it and nobody is afraid of her  that is agreat charm.dear me but what shall you do how shall you employ yourselfwhen you grow oldif i know myself harriet mine is an active busy mind with a greatmany independent resources and i do not perceive why i should bemore in want of employment at forty or fifty than oneandtwenty.womans usual occupations of hand and mind will be as open to me thenas they are now or with no important variation.
if i draw lessi shall read more if i give up music i shall take to carpetwork.and as for objects of interest objects for the affectionswhich is in truth the great point of inferiority the want of whichis really the great evil to be avoided in not marrying i shallbe very well off with all the children of a sister i love so muchto care about.
there will be enough of them in all probabilityto supply every sort of sensation that declining life can need.there will be enough for every hope and every fear and though myattachment to none can equal that of a parent it suits my ideasof comfort better than what is warmer and blinder.
my nephewsand niecesi shall often have a niece with me.do you know miss batess niece  that is i know you must haveseen her a hundred timesbut are you acquaintedoh yes we are always forced to be acquainted whenever she comesto highbury.
by the bye that is almost enough to put one outof conceit with a niece.
heaven forbid at least that i shouldever bore people half so much about all the knightleys togetheras she does about jane fairfax.
one is sick of the very nameof jane fairfax.
every letter from her is read forty times overher compliments to all friends go round and round again and if shedoes but send her aunt the pattern of a stomacher or knit a pairof garters for her grandmother one hears of nothing else for a month.i wish jane fairfax very well but she tires me to death.they were now approaching the cottage and all idle topicswere superseded.
emma was very compassionate and the distressesof the poor were as sure of relief from her personal attentionand kindness her counsel and her patience as from her purse.she understood their ways could allow for their ignorance andtheir temptations had no romantic expectations of extraordinaryvirtue from those for whom education had done so little entered intotheir troubles with ready sympathy and always gave her assistancewith as much intelligence as goodwill.
in the present instanceit was sickness and poverty together which she came to visitand after remaining there as long as she could give comfort or adviceshe quitted the cottage with such an impression of the sceneas made her say to harriet as they walked awaythese are the sights harriet to do one good.
how trifling theymake every thing else appeari feel now as if i could think ofnothing but these poor creatures all the rest of the day and yetwho can say how soon it may all vanish from my mindvery true said harriet.
poor creatures one can thinkof nothing else.and really i do not think the impression will soon be oversaid emma as she crossed the low hedge and tottering footstepwhich ended the narrow slippery path through the cottage gardenand brought them into the lane again.
i do not think it willstopping to look once more at all the outward wretchedness of the placeand recall the still greater within.oh dear no said her companion.they walked on.
the lane made a slight bend and when that bendwas passed mr. elton was immediately in sight and so nearas to give emma time only to say fartherah  harriet here comes a very sudden trial of our stabilityin good thoughts.
well smiling i hope it may be allowed thatif compassion has produced exertion and relief to the sufferersit has done all that is truly important.
if we feel for the wretchedenough to do all we can for them the rest is empty sympathyonly distressing to ourselves.harriet could just answer oh dear yes before the gentlemanjoined them.
the wants and sufferings of the poor family howeverwere the first subject on meeting.
he had been going to callon them.
his visit he would now defer but they had a veryinteresting parley about what could be done and should be done.mr.
elton then turned back to accompany them.to fall in with each other on such an errand as this thought emmato meet in a charitable scheme this will bring a great increaseof love on each side.
i should not wonder if it were to bringon the declaration.
it must if i were not here.
i wish i wereanywhere else.anxious to separate herself from them as far as she could she soonafterwards took possession of a narrow footpath a little raisedon one side of the lane leaving them together in the main road.but she had not been there two minutes when she found that harrietshabits of dependence and imitation were bringing her up too and thatin short they would both be soon after her.
this would not doshe immediately stopped under pretence of having some alterationto make in the lacing of her halfboot and stooping down in completeoccupation of the footpath begged them to have the goodness to walk onand she would follow in half a minute.
they did as they were desiredand by the time she judged it reasonable to have done with her bootshe had the comfort of farther delay in her power being overtakenby a child from the cottage setting out according to orderswith her pitcher to fetch broth from hartfield.
to walk by the sideof this child and talk to and question her was the most naturalthing in the world or would have been the most natural had she beenacting just then without design and by this means the others werestill able to keep ahead without any obligation of waiting for her.she gained on them however involuntarily  the childs pace was quickand theirs rather slow and she was the more concerned at itfrom their being evidently in a conversation which interested them.mr.
elton was speaking with animation harriet listening with a verypleased attention and emma having sent the child on was beginningto think how she might draw back a little more when they bothlooked around and she was obliged to join them.mr.
elton was still talking still engaged in some interesting detailand emma experienced some disappointment when she found that hewas only giving his fair companion an account of the yesterdaysparty at his friend coles and that she was come in herself forthe stilton cheese the north wiltshire the butter the cellerythe beetroot and all the dessert.this would soon have led to something better of course was herconsoling reflection any thing interests between those who loveand any thing will serve as introduction to what is near the heart.if i could but have kept longer awaythey now walked on together quietly till within view of the vicaragepales when a sudden resolution of at least getting harriet intothe house made her again find something very much amiss about her bootand fall behind to arrange it once more.
she then broke the laceoff short and dexterously throwing it into a ditch was presentlyobliged to entreat them to stop and acknowledged her inability toput herself to rights so as to be able to walk home in tolerable comfort.part of my lace is gone said she and i do not know how i amto contrive.
i really am a most troublesome companion to you bothbut i hope i am not often so illequipped.
mr. elton i must begleave to stop at your house and ask your housekeeper for a bitof ribband or string or any thing just to keep my boot on.mr.
elton looked all happiness at this proposition and nothingcould exceed his alertness and attention in conducting them intohis house and endeavouring to make every thing appear to advantage.the room they were taken into was the one he chiefly occupiedand looking forwards behind it was another with which it immediatelycommunicated the door between them was open and emma passedinto it with the housekeeper to receive her assistance in the mostcomfortable manner.
she was obliged to leave the door ajar as shefound it but she fully intended that mr. elton should close it.it was not closed however it still remained ajar but by engagingthe housekeeper in incessant conversation she hoped to make itpracticable for him to chuse his own subject in the adjoining room.for ten minutes she could hear nothing but herself.
it couldbe protracted no longer.
she was then obliged to be finishedand make her appearance.the lovers were standing together at one of the windows.
it had amost favourable aspect and for half a minute emma felt the gloryof having schemed successfully.
but it would not do he had notcome to the point.
he had been most agreeable most delightfulhe had told harriet that he had seen them go by and had purposelyfollowed them other little gallantries and allusions had been droptbut nothing serious.cautious very cautious thought emma he advances inch by inchand will hazard nothing till he believes himself secure.still however though every thing had not been accomplishedby her ingenious device she could not but flatter herselfthat it had been the occasion of much present enjoyment to bothand must be leading them forward to the great event.chapter ximr.
elton must now be left to himself.
it was no longer in emmaspower to superintend his happiness or quicken his measures.the coming of her sisters family was so very near at handthat first in anticipation and then in reality it became henceforthher prime object of interest and during the ten days of their stayat hartfield it was not to be expectedshe did not herself expectthat any thing beyond occasional fortuitous assistance couldbe afforded by her to the lovers.
they might advance rapidlyif they would however they must advance somehow or other whetherthey would or no.
she hardly wished to have more leisure for them.there are people who the more you do for them the less they willdo for themselves.mr.
and mrs. john knightley from having been longer than usualabsent from surry were exciting of course rather more than theusual interest.
till this year every long vacation since theirmarriage had been divided between hartfield and donwell abbeybut all the holidays of this autumn had been given to seabathingfor the children and it was therefore many months since they hadbeen seen in a regular way by their surry connexions or seen at allby mr. woodhouse who could not be induced to get so far as londoneven for poor isabellas sake and who consequently was now mostnervously and apprehensively happy in forestalling this too short visit.he thought much of the evils of the journey for her and not alittle of the fatigues of his own horses and coachman who were tobring some of the party the last half of the way but his alarmswere needless the sixteen miles being happily accomplishedand mr. and mrs. john knightley their five children and a competentnumber of nurserymaids all reaching hartfield in safety.the bustle and joy of such an arrival the many to be talked towelcomed encouraged and variously dispersed and disposed ofproduced a noise and confusion which his nerves could not have borneunder any other cause nor have endured much longer even for thisbut the ways of hartfield and the feelings of her father wereso respected by mrs. john knightley that in spite of maternalsolicitude for the immediate enjoyment of her little onesand for their having instantly all the liberty and attendanceall the eating and drinking and sleeping and playingwhich they could possibly wish for without the smallest delaythe children were never allowed to be long a disturbance to himeither in themselves or in any restless attendance on them.mrs.
john knightley was a pretty elegant little woman of gentlequiet manners and a disposition remarkably amiable and affectionatewrapt up in her family a devoted wife a doating motherand so tenderly attached to her father and sister that but forthese higher ties a warmer love might have seemed impossible.she could never see a fault in any of them.
she was not a womanof strong understanding or any quickness and with this resemblanceof her father she inherited also much of his constitutionwas delicate in her own health overcareful of that of her childrenhad many fears and many nerves and was as fond of her own mr. wingfieldin town as her father could be of mr. perry.
they were alike tooin a general benevolence of temper and a strong habit of regardfor every old acquaintance.mr.
john knightley was a tall gentlemanlike and very clever manrising in his profession domestic and respectable in hisprivate character but with reserved manners which prevented his beinggenerally pleasing and capable of being sometimes out of humour.he was not an illtempered man not so often unreasonably crossas to deserve such a reproach but his temper was not hisgreat perfection and indeed with such a worshipping wifeit was hardly possible that any natural defects in it should notbe increased.
the extreme sweetness of her temper must hurt his.he had all the clearness and quickness of mind which she wantedand he could sometimes act an ungracious or say a severe thing.he was not a great favourite with his fair sisterinlaw.
nothingwrong in him escaped her.
she was quick in feeling the littleinjuries to isabella which isabella never felt herself.perhaps she might have passed over more had his manners beenflattering to isabellas sister but they were only those of a calmlykind brother and friend without praise and without blindnessbut hardly any degree of personal compliment could have made herregardless of that greatest fault of all in her eyes which he sometimesfell into the want of respectful forbearance towards her father.there he had not always the patience that could have been wished.mr.
woodhouses peculiarities and fidgetiness were sometimes provokinghim to a rational remonstrance or sharp retort equally illbestowed.it did not often happen for mr. john knightley had really a greatregard for his fatherinlaw and generally a strong sense of what wasdue to him but it was too often for emmas charity especially asthere was all the pain of apprehension frequently to be enduredthough the offence came not.
the beginning however of every visitdisplayed none but the properest feelings and this being of necessityso short might be hoped to pass away in unsullied cordiality.they had not been long seated and composed when mr. woodhousewith a melancholy shake of the head and a sigh called his daughtersattention to the sad change at hartfield since she had been there last.ah my dear said he poor miss taylorit is a grievous business.oh yes sir cried she with ready sympathy how you mustmiss her  and dear emma toowhat a dreadful loss to you bothi have been so grieved for you.i could not imagine how you couldpossibly do without her.it is a sad change indeed.but i hopeshe is pretty well sir.pretty well my deari hopepretty well.i do not knowbut that the place agrees with her tolerably.mr.
john knightley here asked emma quietly whether there were anydoubts of the air of randalls.oh nonone in the least.
i never saw mrs. weston better in my lifenever looking so well.
papa is only speaking his own regret.very much to the honour of both was the handsome reply.and do you see her sir tolerably often asked isabellain the plaintive tone which just suited her father.mr.
woodhouse hesitated.not near so often my dear as i could wish.oh papa we have missed seeing them but one entire day sincethey married.
either in the morning or evening of every dayexcepting one have we seen either mr. weston or mrs. westonand generally both either at randalls or hereand as youmay suppose isabella most frequently here.
they are veryvery kind in their visits.
mr. weston is really as kind as herself.papa if you speak in that melancholy way you will be givingisabella a false idea of us all.
every body must be aware that misstaylor must be missed but every body ought also to be assuredthat mr. and mrs. weston do really prevent our missing her by anymeans to the extent we ourselves anticipatedwhich is the exact truth.just as it should be said mr. john knightley and just as i hopedit was from your letters.
her wish of shewing you attention couldnot be doubted and his being a disengaged and social man makes itall easy.
i have been always telling you my love that i had no ideaof the change being so very material to hartfield as you apprehendedand now you have emmas account i hope you will be satisfied.why to be sure said mr. woodhouseyes certainlyi cannot denythat mrs. weston poor mrs. weston does come and see us pretty oftenbut thenshe is always obliged to go away again.it would be very hard upon mr. weston if she did not papa.you quite forget poor mr. weston.i think indeed said john knightley pleasantly that mr. westonhas some little claim.
you and i emma will venture to take the partof the poor husband.
i being a husband and you not being a wifethe claims of the man may very likely strike us with equal force.as for isabella she has been married long enough to see the convenienceof putting all the mr. westons aside as much as she can.me my love cried his wife hearing and understanding only in part.are you talking about mei am sure nobody ought to be or can bea greater advocate for matrimony than i am and if it had not beenfor the misery of her leaving hartfield i should never have thoughtof miss taylor but as the most fortunate woman in the worldand as to slighting mr. weston that excellent mr. weston i thinkthere is nothing he does not deserve.
i believe he is one of thevery besttempered men that ever existed.
excepting yourselfand your brother i do not know his equal for temper.
i shallnever forget his flying henrys kite for him that very windy daylast easterand ever since his particular kindness last septembertwelvemonth in writing that note at twelve oclock at nighton purpose to assure me that there was no scarlet fever at cobhami have been convinced there could not be a more feeling heart nora better man in existence.if any body can deserve him it must bemiss taylor.where is the young man said john knightley.
has he been hereon this occasionor has he nothe has not been here yet replied emma.
there was a strongexpectation of his coming soon after the marriage but it endedin nothing and i have not heard him mentioned lately.but you should tell them of the letter my dear said her father.he wrote a letter to poor mrs. weston to congratulate herand a very proper handsome letter it was.
she shewed it to me.i thought it very well done of him indeed.
whether it was his own ideayou know one cannot tell.
he is but young and his uncle perhapsmy dear papa he is threeandtwenty.
you forget how time passes.threeandtwentyis he indeedwell i could not have thought itand he was but two years old when he lost his poor mother  welltime does fly indeedand my memory is very bad.
however it wasan exceeding good pretty letter and gave mr. and mrs. westona great deal of pleasure.
i remember it was written from weymouthand dated sept. thand began my dear madam but i forgethow it went on and it was signed f. c. weston churchill.i remember that perfectly.how very pleasing and proper of him cried the goodhearted mrs. johnknightley.
i have no doubt of his being a most amiable young man.but how sad it is that he should not live at home with his fatherthere is something so shocking in a childs being taken away from hisparents and natural home  i never could comprehend how mr. westoncould part with him.
to give up ones child  i really nevercould think well of any body who proposed such a thing to any body else.nobody ever did think well of the churchills i fancyobserved mr. john knightley coolly.
but you need not imaginemr.
weston to have felt what you would feel in giving up henryor john.
mr. weston is rather an easy cheerfultempered manthan a man of strong feelings he takes things as he finds themand makes enjoyment of them somehow or other depending i suspectmuch more upon what is called society for his comforts that isupon the power of eating and drinking and playing whist with hisneighbours five times a week than upon family affection or anything that home affords.emma could not like what bordered on a reflection on mr. westonand had half a mind to take it up but she struggled and letit pass.
she would keep the peace if possible and there wassomething honourable and valuable in the strong domestic habitsthe allsufficiency of home to himself whence resulted her brothersdisposition to look down on the common rate of social intercourseand those to whom it was important.it had a high claim to forbearance.chapter xiimr.
knightley was to dine with themrather against the inclinationof mr. woodhouse who did not like that any one should share with himin isabellas first day.
emmas sense of right however had decided itand besides the consideration of what was due to each brothershe had particular pleasure from the circumstance of the latedisagreement between mr. knightley and herself in procuring himthe proper invitation.she hoped they might now become friends again.
she thought itwas time to make up.
makingup indeed would not do.
she certainlyhad not been in the wrong and he would never own that he had.concession must be out of the question but it was time to appearto forget that they had ever quarrelled and she hoped it might ratherassist the restoration of friendship that when he came into the roomshe had one of the children with herthe youngest a nice little girlabout eight months old who was now making her first visit to hartfieldand very happy to be danced about in her aunts arms.
it did assistfor though he began with grave looks and short questions he was soonled on to talk of them all in the usual way and to take the childout of her arms with all the unceremoniousness of perfect amity.emma felt they were friends again and the conviction givingher at first great satisfaction and then a little saucinessshe could not help saying as he was admiring the babywhat a comfort it is that we think alike about our nephews and nieces.as to men and women our opinions are sometimes very differentbut with regard to these children i observe we never disagree.if you were as much guided by nature in your estimate of menand women and as little under the power of fancy and whim in yourdealings with them as you are where these children are concernedwe might always think alike.to be sureour discordancies must always arise from my beingin the wrong.yes said he smilingand reason good.
i was sixteen yearsold when you were born.a material difference then she repliedand no doubt you weremuch my superior in judgment at that period of our lives but doesnot the lapse of oneandtwenty years bring our understandingsa good deal neareryesa good deal nearer.but still not near enough to give me a chance of being rightif we think differently.i have still the advantage of you by sixteen years experience and bynot being a pretty young woman and a spoiled child.
come my dear emmalet us be friends and say no more about it.
tell your aunt little emmathat she ought to set you a better example than to be renewingold grievances and that if she were not wrong before she is now.thats true she criedvery true.
little emma grow upa better woman than your aunt.
be infinitely cleverer and nothalf so conceited.
now mr. knightley a word or two more and ihave done.
as far as good intentions went we were both rightand i must say that no effects on my side of the argument have yetproved wrong.
i only want to know that mr. martin is not veryvery bitterly disappointed.a man cannot be more so was his short full answer.ahindeed i am very sorry.come shake hands with me.this had just taken place and with great cordiality when johnknightley made his appearance and how dye do george and johnhow are you succeeded in the true english style burying undera calmness that seemed all but indifference the real attachmentwhich would have led either of them if requisite to do every thingfor the good of the other.the evening was quiet and conversable as mr. woodhouse declinedcards entirely for the sake of comfortable talk with hisdear isabella and the little party made two natural divisionson one side he and his daughter on the other the two mr. knightleystheir subjects totally distinct or very rarely mixingand emmaonly occasionally joining in one or the other.the brothers talked of their own concerns and pursuits but principallyof those of the elder whose temper was by much the most communicativeand who was always the greater talker.
as a magistrate he hadgenerally some point of law to consult john about or at leastsome curious anecdote to give and as a farmer as keeping in handthe homefarm at donwell he had to tell what every field was to bearnext year and to give all such local information as could not failof being interesting to a brother whose home it had equally beenthe longest part of his life and whose attachments were strong.the plan of a drain the change of a fence the felling of a treeand the destination of every acre for wheat turnips or spring cornwas entered into with as much equality of interest by john as hiscooler manners rendered possible and if his willing brother everleft him any thing to inquire about his inquiries even approacheda tone of eagerness.while they were thus comfortably occupied mr. woodhouse was enjoyinga full flow of happy regrets and fearful affection with his daughter.my poor dear isabella said he fondly taking her handand interrupting for a few moments her busy labours for some oneof her five childrenhow long it is how terribly long since youwere here  and how tired you must be after your journey  you mustgo to bed early my dearand i recommend a little gruel to youbefore you go.you and i will have a nice basin of gruel together.my dear emma suppose we all have a little gruel.emma could not suppose any such thing knowing as she didthat both the mr. knightleys were as unpersuadable on that articleas herselfand two basins only were ordered.
after a littlemore discourse in praise of gruel with some wondering at itsnot being taken every evening by every body he proceeded to saywith an air of grave reflectionit was an awkward business my dear your spending the autumnat south end instead of coming here.
i never had much opinionof the sea air.mr.
wingfield most strenuously recommended it siror weshould not have gone.
he recommended it for all the childrenbut particularly for the weakness in little bellas throatboth sea air and bathing.ah my dear but perry had many doubts about the sea doing herany good and as to myself i have been long perfectly convincedthough perhaps i never told you so before that the sea is veryrarely of use to any body.
i am sure it almost killed me once.come come cried emma feeling this to be an unsafe subject i mustbeg you not to talk of the sea.
it makes me envious and miserablei who have never seen it  south end is prohibited if you please.my dear isabella i have not heard you make one inquiry aboutmr.
perry yet and he never forgets you.oh good mr. perryhow is he sirwhy pretty well but not quite well.
poor perry is biliousand he has not time to take care of himselfhe tells me he hasnot time to take care of himselfwhich is very sadbut he isalways wanted all round the country.
i suppose there is not a manin such practice anywhere.
but then there is not so clever a manany where.and mrs. perry and the children how are they do the children growi have a great regard for mr. perry.
i hope he will be calling soon.he will be so pleased to see my little ones.i hope he will be here tomorrow for i have a question or two to askhim about myself of some consequence.
and my dear whenever he comesyou had better let him look at little bellas throat.oh my dear sir her throat is so much better that i have hardlyany uneasiness about it.
either bathing has been of the greatestservice to her or else it is to be attributed to an excellentembrocation of mr. wingfields which we have been applyingat times ever since august.it is not very likely my dear that bathing should have beenof use to herand if i had known you were wanting an embrocationi would have spoken toyou seem to me to have forgotten mrs. and miss bates said emmai have not heard one inquiry after them.oh the good batesesi am quite ashamed of myselfbut youmention them in most of your letters.
i hope they are quite well.good old mrs. batesi will call upon her tomorrow and takemy children.they are always so pleased to see my children.and that excellent miss batessuch thorough worthy peoplehow are they sirwhy pretty well my dear upon the whole.
but poor mrs. bateshad a bad cold about a month ago.how sorry i am  but colds were never so prevalent as they have beenthis autumn.
mr. wingfield told me that he has never known themmore general or heavyexcept when it has been quite an influenza.that has been a good deal the case my dear but not to the degreeyou mention.
perry says that colds have been very generalbut not so heavy as he has very often known them in november.perry does not call it altogether a sickly season.no i do not know that mr. wingfield considers it very sickly exceptah my poor dear child the truth is that in london it is alwaysa sickly season.
nobody is healthy in london nobody can be.it is a dreadful thing to have you forced to live there so far offand the air so badno indeedwe are not at all in a bad air.
our part of london isvery superior to most othersyou must not confound us with londonin general my dear sir.
the neighbourhood of brunswick squareis very different from almost all the rest.
we are so very airyi should be unwilling i own to live in any other part of the townthere is hardly any other that i could be satisfied to have mychildren in  but we are so remarkably airymr.
wingfield thinksthe vicinity of brunswick square decidedly the most favourable asto air.ah my dear it is not like hartfield.
you make the best of itbut after you have been a week at hartfield you are all of youdifferent creatures you do not look like the same.
now i cannot saythat i think you are any of you looking well at present.i am sorry to hear you say so sir but i assure you excepting thoselittle nervous headaches and palpitations which i am never entirelyfree from anywhere i am quite well myself and if the children wererather pale before they went to bed it was only because they werea little more tired than usual from their journey and the happinessof coming.
i hope you will think better of their looks tomorrowfor i assure you mr. wingfield told me that he did not believehe had ever sent us off altogether in such good case.
i trustat least that you do not think mr. knightley looking illturning her eyes with affectionate anxiety towards her husband.middling my dear i cannot compliment you.
i think mr. johnknightley very far from looking well.what is the matter sirdid you speak to me cried mr. johnknightley hearing his own name.i am sorry to find my love that my father does not think youlooking wellbut i hope it is only from being a little fatigued.i could have wished however as you know that you had seenmr.
wingfield before you left home.my dear isabellaexclaimed he hastilypray do not concernyourself about my looks.
be satisfied with doctoring and coddlingyourself and the children and let me look as i chuse.i did not thoroughly understand what you were telling your brothercried emma about your friend mr. grahams intending to have a bailifffrom scotland to look after his new estate.
what will it answerwill not the old prejudice be too strongand she talked in this way so long and successfully that when forcedto give her attention again to her father and sister she had nothingworse to hear than isabellas kind inquiry after jane fairfaxand jane fairfax though no great favourite with her in generalshe was at that moment very happy to assist in praising.that sweet amiable jane fairfax said mrs. john knightley.it is so long since i have seen her except now and then for a momentaccidentally in town  what happiness it must be to her good oldgrandmother and excellent aunt when she comes to visit themi always regret excessively on dear emmas account that she cannotbe more at highbury but now their daughter is married i supposecolonel and mrs. campbell will not be able to part with her at all.she would be such a delightful companion for emma.mr.
woodhouse agreed to it all but addedour little friend harriet smith however is just such anotherpretty kind of young person.
you will like harriet.
emma couldnot have a better companion than harriet.i am most happy to hear itbut only jane fairfax one knows to beso very accomplished and superiorand exactly emmas age.this topic was discussed very happily and others succeeded ofsimilar moment and passed away with similar harmony but the eveningdid not close without a little return of agitation.
the gruel cameand supplied a great deal to be saidmuch praise and many commentsundoubting decision of its wholesomeness for every constitutionand pretty severe philippics upon the many houses where it wasnever met with tolerablebut unfortunately among the failureswhich the daughter had to instance the most recent and thereforemost prominent was in her own cook at south end a young womanhired for the time who never had been able to understand what shemeant by a basin of nice smooth gruel thin but not too thin.often as she had wished for and ordered it she had never been ableto get any thing tolerable.
here was a dangerous opening.ah said mr. woodhouse shaking his head and fixing his eyes onher with tender concern.the ejaculation in emmas ear expressedah there is no end of the sad consequences of your going tosouth end.
it does not bear talking of.
and for a little whileshe hoped he would not talk of it and that a silent ruminationmight suffice to restore him to the relish of his own smooth gruel.after an interval of some minutes however he began withi shall always be very sorry that you went to the sea this autumninstead of coming here.but why should you be sorry siri assure you it did the childrena great deal of good.and moreover if you must go to the sea it had better nothave been to south end.
south end is an unhealthy place.perry was surprized to hear you had fixed upon south end.i know there is such an idea with many people but indeed it isquite a mistake sir.we all had our health perfectly well therenever found the least inconvenience from the mud and mr. wingfieldsays it is entirely a mistake to suppose the place unhealthyand i am sure he may be depended on for he thoroughly understandsthe nature of the air and his own brother and family have beenthere repeatedly.you should have gone to cromer my dear if you went anywhere.perry was a week at cromer once and he holds it to be the bestof all the seabathing places.
a fine open sea he says and verypure air.
and by what i understand you might have had lodgings therequite away from the seaa quarter of a mile offvery comfortable.you should have consulted perry.but my dear sir the difference of the journeyonly consider howgreat it would have been.an hundred miles perhaps instead of forty.ah my dear as perry says where health is at stake nothing elseshould be considered and if one is to travel there is not muchto chuse between forty miles and an hundred.better not move at allbetter stay in london altogether than travel forty miles to getinto a worse air.
this is just what perry said.
it seemed to hima very illjudged measure.emmas attempts to stop her father had been vain and when hehad reached such a point as this she could not wonder at herbrotherinlaws breaking out.mr.
perry said he in a voice of very strong displeasurewould do as well to keep his opinion till it is asked for.why does he make it any business of his to wonder at what i doat my taking my family to one part of the coast or anotheri maybe allowed i hope the use of my judgment as well as mr. perry.i want his directions no more than his drugs.
he pausedand growing cooler in a moment added with only sarcastic drynessif mr. perry can tell me how to convey a wife and five childrena distance of an hundred and thirty miles with no greater expenseor inconvenience than a distance of forty i should be as willing toprefer cromer to south end as he could himself.true true cried mr. knightley with most ready interpositionvery true.
thats a consideration indeed.but john as to what iwas telling you of my idea of moving the path to langham of turningit more to the right that it may not cut through the home meadowsi cannot conceive any difficulty.
i should not attempt itif it were to be the means of inconvenience to the highbury peoplebut if you call to mind exactly the present line of the path.
.
.
.the only way of proving it however will be to turn to our maps.i shall see you at the abbey tomorrow morning i hope and then wewill look them over and you shall give me your opinion.mr.
woodhouse was rather agitated by such harsh reflections onhis friend perry to whom he had in fact though unconsciouslybeen attributing many of his own feelings and expressionsbut the soothing attentions of his daughters gradually removedthe present evil and the immediate alertness of one brotherand better recollections of the other prevented any renewal of it.chapter xiiithere could hardly be a happier creature in the world than mrs. johnknightley in this short visit to hartfield going about every morningamong her old acquaintance with her five children and talkingover what she had done every evening with her father and sister.she had nothing to wish otherwise but that the days did not passso swiftly.
it was a delightful visitperfect in being much too short.in general their evenings were less engaged with friends thantheir mornings but one complete dinner engagement and outof the house too there was no avoiding though at christmas.mr.
weston would take no denial they must all dine at randallsone dayeven mr. woodhouse was persuaded to think it a possiblething in preference to a division of the party.how they were all to be conveyed he would have made a difficultyif he could but as his son and daughters carriage and horseswere actually at hartfield he was not able to make more thana simple question on that head it hardly amounted to a doubtnor did it occupy emma long to convince him that they might in oneof the carriages find room for harriet also.harriet mr. elton and mr. knightley their own especial setwere the only persons invited to meet themthe hours were to be earlyas well as the numbers few mr. woodhouses habits and inclinationbeing consulted in every thing.the evening before this great event for it was a very great eventthat mr. woodhouse should dine out on the th of december had beenspent by harriet at hartfield and she had gone home so much indisposedwith a cold that but for her own earnest wish of being nursedby mrs. goddard emma could not have allowed her to leave the house.emma called on her the next day and found her doom already signedwith regard to randalls.
she was very feverish and had a badsore throat  mrs. goddard was full of care and affection mr. perrywas talked of and harriet herself was too ill and low to resistthe authority which excluded her from this delightful engagementthough she could not speak of her loss without many tears.emma sat with her as long as she could to attend her in mrs. goddardsunavoidable absences and raise her spirits by representing how muchmr.
eltons would be depressed when he knew her state and left herat last tolerably comfortable in the sweet dependence of his havinga most comfortless visit and of their all missing her very much.she had not advanced many yards from mrs. goddards door when shewas met by mr. elton himself evidently coming towards it and asthey walked on slowly together in conversation about the invalidof whom he on the rumour of considerable illness had been goingto inquire that he might carry some report of her to hartfieldthey were overtaken by mr. john knightley returning from thedaily visit to donwell with his two eldest boys whose healthyglowing faces shewed all the benefit of a country run and seemedto ensure a quick despatch of the roast mutton and rice pudding theywere hastening home for.
they joined company and proceeded together.emma was just describing the nature of her friends complainta throat very much inflamed with a great deal of heat about hera quick low pulse c.  and she was sorry to find from mrs. goddardthat harriet was liable to very bad sorethroats and had oftenalarmed her with them.
mr. elton looked all alarm on the occasionas he exclaimeda sorethroati hope not infectious.
i hope not of a putridinfectious sort.
has perry seen her  indeed you should take careof yourself as well as of your friend.
let me entreat you to runno risks.
why does not perry see heremma who was not really at all frightened herself tranquillised thisexcess of apprehension by assurances of mrs. goddards experienceand care but as there must still remain a degree of uneasinesswhich she could not wish to reason away which she would ratherfeed and assist than not she added soon afterwardsas if quiteanother subjectit is so cold so very coldand looks and feels so very muchlike snow that if it were to any other place or with any other partyi should really try not to go out todayand dissuade my fatherfrom venturing but as he has made up his mind and does not seemto feel the cold himself i do not like to interfere as i know itwould be so great a disappointment to mr. and mrs. weston.
but uponmy word mr. elton in your case i should certainly excuse myself.you appear to me a little hoarse already and when you considerwhat demand of voice and what fatigues tomorrow will bringi think it would be no more than common prudence to stay at homeand take care of yourself tonight.mr.
elton looked as if he did not very well know what answer to makewhich was exactly the case for though very much gratified by the kindcare of such a fair lady and not liking to resist any advice ofhers he had not really the least inclination to give up the visitbut emma too eager and busy in her own previous conceptionsand views to hear him impartially or see him with clear visionwas very well satisfied with his muttering acknowledgment of itsbeing very cold certainly very cold and walked on rejoicing inhaving extricated him from randalls and secured him the powerof sending to inquire after harriet every hour of the evening.you do quite right said shewe will make your apologiesto mr. and mrs. weston.but hardly had she so spoken when she found her brother was civillyoffering a seat in his carriage if the weather were mr. eltonsonly objection and mr. elton actually accepting the offer with muchprompt satisfaction.
it was a done thing mr. elton was to goand never had his broad handsome face expressed more pleasure thanat this moment never had his smile been stronger nor his eyesmore exulting than when he next looked at her.well said she to herself this is most strangeafter ihad got him off so well to chuse to go into company and leaveharriet ill behindmost strange indeedbut there is i believein many men especially single men such an inclinationsuch a passion for dining outa dinner engagement is so high inthe class of their pleasures their employments their dignitiesalmost their duties that any thing gives way to itand this mustbe the case with mr. elton a most valuable amiable pleasing youngman undoubtedly and very much in love with harriet but stillhe cannot refuse an invitation he must dine out wherever he is asked.what a strange thing love is he can see ready wit in harrietbut will not dine alone for her.soon afterwards mr. elton quitted them and she could not but do himthe justice of feeling that there was a great deal of sentimentin his manner of naming harriet at parting in the tone of hisvoice while assuring her that he should call at mrs. goddardsfor news of her fair friend the last thing before he preparedfor the happiness of meeting her again when he hoped to beable to give a better report and he sighed and smiled himselfoff in a way that left the balance of approbation much in his favour.after a few minutes of entire silence between them john knightleybegan withi never in my life saw a man more intent on being agreeable thanmr.
elton.
it is downright labour to him where ladies are concerned.with men he can be rational and unaffected but when he has ladiesto please every feature works.mr.
eltons manners are not perfect replied emma but where thereis a wish to please one ought to overlook and one does overlooka great deal.
where a man does his best with only moderate powershe will have the advantage over negligent superiority.
there issuch perfect goodtemper and goodwill in mr. elton as one cannotbut value.yes said mr. john knightley presently with some slynesshe seems to have a great deal of goodwill towards you.me she replied with a smile of astonishment are you imaginingme to be mr. eltons objectsuch an imagination has crossed me i own emma and if it neveroccurred to you before you may as well take it into consideration now.mr.
elton in love with mewhat an ideai do not say it is so but you will do well to consider whetherit is so or not and to regulate your behaviour accordingly.i think your manners to him encouraging.
i speak as a friendemma.
you had better look about you and ascertain what you doand what you mean to do.i thank you but i assure you you are quite mistaken.
mr. eltonand i are very good friends and nothing more and she walked onamusing herself in the consideration of the blunders which oftenarise from a partial knowledge of circumstances of the mistakeswhich people of high pretensions to judgment are for ever falling intoand not very well pleased with her brother for imagining her blindand ignorant and in want of counsel.
he said no more.mr.
woodhouse had so completely made up his mind to the visitthat in spite of the increasing coldness he seemed to have no ideaof shrinking from it and set forward at last most punctuallywith his eldest daughter in his own carriage with less apparentconsciousness of the weather than either of the others too fullof the wonder of his own going and the pleasure it was to afford atrandalls to see that it was cold and too well wrapt up to feel it.the cold however was severe and by the time the second carriagewas in motion a few flakes of snow were finding their way downand the sky had the appearance of being so overcharged as to want onlya milder air to produce a very white world in a very short time.emma soon saw that her companion was not in the happiest humour.the preparing and the going abroad in such weather with the sacrificeof his children after dinner were evils were disagreeables at leastwhich mr. john knightley did not by any means like he anticipatednothing in the visit that could be at all worth the purchaseand the whole of their drive to the vicarage was spent by him inexpressing his discontent.a man said he must have a very good opinion of himself whenhe asks people to leave their own fireside and encounter sucha day as this for the sake of coming to see him.
he must thinkhimself a most agreeable fellow i could not do such a thing.it is the greatest absurdityactually snowing at this momentthe folly of not allowing people to be comfortable at homeand thefolly of peoples not staying comfortably at home when they canif we were obliged to go out such an evening as this by any call ofduty or business what a hardship we should deem itand here are weprobably with rather thinner clothing than usual setting forwardvoluntarily without excuse in defiance of the voice of naturewhich tells man in every thing given to his view or his feelingsto stay at home himself and keep all under shelter that he canhere are we setting forward to spend five dull hours in anothermans house with nothing to say or to hear that was not saidand heard yesterday and may not be said and heard again tomorrow.going in dismal weather to return probably in worsefour horsesand four servants taken out for nothing but to convey five idleshivering creatures into colder rooms and worse company than theymight have had at home.emma did not find herself equal to give the pleased assent which no doubthe was in the habit of receiving to emulate the very true my lovewhich must have been usually administered by his travelling companionbut she had resolution enough to refrain from making any answerat all.
she could not be complying she dreaded being quarrelsomeher heroism reached only to silence.
she allowed him to talkand arranged the glasses and wrapped herself up without openingher lips.they arrived the carriage turned the step was let downand mr. elton spruce black and smiling was with them instantly.emma thought with pleasure of some change of subject.
mr. eltonwas all obligation and cheerfulness he was so very cheerfulin his civilities indeed that she began to think he must havereceived a different account of harriet from what had reached her.she had sent while dressing and the answer had been much the samenot better.my report from mrs. goddards said she presently was notso pleasant as i had hopednot better was my answer.his face lengthened immediately and his voice was the voiceof sentiment as he answered.oh noi am grieved to findi was on the point of telling you thatwhen i called at mrs. goddards door which i did the very last thingbefore i returned to dress i was told that miss smith was not betterby no means better rather worse.
very much grieved and concernedi had flattered myself that she must be better after such a cordialas i knew had been given her in the morning.emma smiled and answeredmy visit was of use to the nervous partof her complaint i hope but not even i can charm away a sore throatit is a most severe cold indeed.
mr. perry has been with heras you probably heard.yesi imaginedthat isi did nothe has been used to her in these complaints and i hope tomorrowmorning will bring us both a more comfortable report.
but it isimpossible not to feel uneasiness.
such a sad loss to our party todaydreadfulexactly so indeed.she will be missed every moment.this was very proper the sigh which accompanied it was really estimablebut it should have lasted longer.
emma was rather in dismay whenonly half a minute afterwards he began to speak of other thingsand in a voice of the greatest alacrity and enjoyment.what an excellent device said he the use of a sheepskinfor carriages.
how very comfortable they make itimpossible tofeel cold with such precautions.
the contrivances of modern daysindeed have rendered a gentlemans carriage perfectly complete.one is so fenced and guarded from the weather that not a breathof air can find its way unpermitted.
weather becomes absolutelyof no consequence.
it is a very cold afternoonbut in this carriagewe know nothing of the matter.ha snows a little i see.yes said john knightley and i think we shall have a good dealof it.christmas weather observed mr. elton.
quite seasonableand extremely fortunate we may think ourselves that it did notbegin yesterday and prevent this days party which it might verypossibly have done for mr. woodhouse would hardly have ventured hadthere been much snow on the ground but now it is of no consequence.this is quite the season indeed for friendly meetings.
at christmasevery body invites their friends about them and people think littleof even the worst weather.
i was snowed up at a friends house oncefor a week.
nothing could be pleasanter.
i went for only one nightand could not get away till that very day sennight.mr.
john knightley looked as if he did not comprehend the pleasurebut said only coollyi cannot wish to be snowed up a week at randalls.at another time emma might have been amused but she was toomuch astonished now at mr. eltons spirits for other feelings.harriet seemed quite forgotten in the expectation of a pleasant party.we are sure of excellent fires continued he and every thingin the greatest comfort.
charming people mr. and mrs. westonmrs.
weston indeed is much beyond praise and he is exactlywhat one values so hospitable and so fond of societyit will be a small party but where small parties are selectthey are perhaps the most agreeable of any.
mr. westons diningroomdoes not accommodate more than ten comfortably and for my parti would rather under such circumstances fall short by two thanexceed by two.
i think you will agree with me turning with a softair to emma i think i shall certainly have your approbationthough mr. knightley perhaps from being used to the large partiesof london may not quite enter into our feelings.i know nothing of the large parties of london siri never dinewith any body.indeed in a tone of wonder and pity i had no idea that thelaw had been so great a slavery.
well sir the time must comewhen you will be paid for all this when you will have littlelabour and great enjoyment.my first enjoyment replied john knightley as they passed throughthe sweepgate will be to find myself safe at hartfield again.chapter xivsome change of countenance was necessary for each gentlemanas they walked into mrs. westons drawingroommr.
elton mustcompose his joyous looks and mr. john knightley disperse hisillhumour.
mr. elton must smile less and mr. john knightley moreto fit them for the place.emma only might be as nature promptedand shew herself just as happy as she was.
to her it was realenjoyment to be with the westons.
mr. weston was a great favouriteand there was not a creature in the world to whom she spoke withsuch unreserve as to his wife not any one to whom she relatedwith such conviction of being listened to and understood of beingalways interesting and always intelligible the little affairsarrangements perplexities and pleasures of her father and herself.she could tell nothing of hartfield in which mrs. weston had nota lively concern and half an hours uninterrupted communicationof all those little matters on which the daily happiness of privatelife depends was one of the first gratifications of each.this was a pleasure which perhaps the whole days visit mightnot afford which certainly did not belong to the present halfhourbut the very sight of mrs. weston her smile her touch her voicewas grateful to emma and she determined to think as little aspossible of mr. eltons oddities or of any thing else unpleasantand enjoy all that was enjoyable to the utmost.the misfortune of harriets cold had been pretty well gone throughbefore her arrival.
mr. woodhouse had been safely seated longenough to give the history of it besides all the history of his ownand isabellas coming and of emmas being to follow and had indeedjust got to the end of his satisfaction that james should comeand see his daughter when the others appeared and mrs. westonwho had been almost wholly engrossed by her attentions to himwas able to turn away and welcome her dear emma.emmas project of forgetting mr. elton for a while made her rathersorry to find when they had all taken their places that he wasclose to her.
the difficulty was great of driving his strangeinsensibility towards harriet from her mind while he not only satat her elbow but was continually obtruding his happy countenanceon her notice and solicitously addressing her upon every occasion.instead of forgetting him his behaviour was such that she couldnot avoid the internal suggestion of can it really be as my brotherimagined can it be possible for this man to be beginning to transferhis affections from harriet to meabsurd and insufferableyet he would be so anxious for her being perfectly warm would beso interested about her father and so delighted with mrs. westonand at last would begin admiring her drawings with so much zealand so little knowledge as seemed terribly like a wouldbe loverand made it some effort with her to preserve her good manners.for her own sake she could not be rude and for harriets in the hopethat all would yet turn out right she was even positively civilbut it was an effort especially as something was going on amongstthe others in the most overpowering period of mr. eltons nonsensewhich she particularly wished to listen to.
she heard enoughto know that mr. weston was giving some information about his sonshe heard the words my son and frank and my sonrepeated several times over and from a few other halfsyllablesvery much suspected that he was announcing an early visit fromhis son but before she could quiet mr. elton the subject wasso completely past that any reviving question from her would havebeen awkward.now it so happened that in spite of emmas resolution of never marryingthere was something in the name in the idea of mr. frank churchillwhich always interested her.
she had frequently thoughtespecially sincehis fathers marriage with miss taylorthat if she were to marryhe was the very person to suit her in age character and condition.he seemed by this connexion between the families quite to belong to her.she could not but suppose it to be a match that every body who knewthem must think of.
that mr. and mrs. weston did think of it she wasvery strongly persuaded and though not meaning to be induced by himor by any body else to give up a situation which she believed morereplete with good than any she could change it for she had a greatcuriosity to see him a decided intention of finding him pleasantof being liked by him to a certain degree and a sort of pleasurein the idea of their being coupled in their friends imaginations.with such sensations mr. eltons civilities were dreadfully illtimedbut she had the comfort of appearing very polite while feelingvery crossand of thinking that the rest of the visit could notpossibly pass without bringing forward the same information againor the substance of it from the openhearted mr. weston.so it provedfor when happily released from mr. elton and seated by mr. westonat dinner he made use of the very first interval in the caresof hospitality the very first leisure from the saddle of muttonto say to herwe want only two more to be just the right number.
i shouldlike to see two more hereyour pretty little friend miss smithand my sonand then i should say we were quite complete.i believe you did not hear me telling the others in the drawingroomthat we are expecting frank.
i had a letter from him this morningand he will be with us within a fortnight.emma spoke with a very proper degree of pleasure and fully assentedto his proposition of mr. frank churchill and miss smith makingtheir party quite complete.he has been wanting to come to us continued mr. westonever since september  every letter has been full of itbut he cannot command his own time.
he has those to pleasewho must be pleased and who between ourselves are sometimesto be pleased only by a good many sacrifices.
but nowi have no doubt of seeing him here about the second week in january.what a very great pleasure it will be to you and mrs. westonis so anxious to be acquainted with him that she must be almostas happy as yourself.yes she would be but that she thinks there will be anotherputoff.
she does not depend upon his coming so much as i dobut she does not know the parties so well as i do.
the caseyou see isbut this is quite between ourselves  i did not mentiona syllable of it in the other room.
there are secrets in all familiesyou knowthe case is that a party of friends are invited to paya visit at enscombe in january and that franks coming depends upontheir being put off.
if they are not put off he cannot stir.but i know they will because it is a family that a certain ladyof some consequence at enscombe has a particular dislike toand though it is thought necessary to invite them once in two orthree years they always are put off when it comes to the point.i have not the smallest doubt of the issue.
i am as confidentof seeing frank here before the middle of january as i amof being here myself  but your good friend there noddingtowards the upper end of the table has so few vagaries herselfand has been so little used to them at hartfield that she cannotcalculate on their effects as i have been long in the practiceof doing.i am sorry there should be any thing like doubt in the casereplied emma but am disposed to side with you mr. weston.
if youthink he will come i shall think so too for you know enscombe.yesi have some right to that knowledge though i have never beenat the place in my life.she is an odd womanbut i never allowmyself to speak ill of her on franks account for i do believeher to be very fond of him.
i used to think she was not capableof being fond of any body except herself  but she has always beenkind to him in her wayallowing for little whims and capricesand expecting every thing to be as she likes.
and it is no small creditin my opinion to him that he should excite such an affectionfor though i would not say it to any body else she has no moreheart than a stone to people in general and the devil of a temper.emma liked the subject so well that she began upon it to mrs. westonvery soon after their moving into the drawingroom wishing her joyyet observing that she knew the first meeting must be rather alarming.mrs.
weston agreed to it but added that she should be veryglad to be secure of undergoing the anxiety of a first meetingat the time talked of  for i cannot depend upon his coming.i cannot be so sanguine as mr. weston.
i am very much afraidthat it will all end in nothing.
mr. weston i dare say has beentelling you exactly how the matter standsyesit seems to depend upon nothing but the illhumourof mrs. churchill which i imagine to be the most certainthing in the world.my emma replied mrs. weston smiling what is the certaintyof caprice  then turning to isabella who had not beenattending beforeyou must know my dear mrs. knightleythat we are by no means so sure of seeing mr. frank churchillin my opinion as his father thinks.
it depends entirely uponhis aunts spirits and pleasure in short upon her temper.to youto my two daughtersi may venture on the truth.mrs.
churchill rules at enscombe and is a very oddtempered womanand his coming now depends upon her being willing to spare him.oh mrs. churchill every body knows mrs. churchillreplied isabella  and i am sure i never think of that poor youngman without the greatest compassion.
to be constantly livingwith an illtempered person must be dreadful.
it is what wehappily have never known any thing of but it must be a lifeof misery.
what a blessing that she never had any childrenpoor little creatures how unhappy she would have made thememma wished she had been alone with mrs. weston.
she should then haveheard more  mrs. weston would speak to her with a degree of unreservewhich she would not hazard with isabella and she really believedwould scarcely try to conceal any thing relative to the churchillsfrom her excepting those views on the young man of which her ownimagination had already given her such instinctive knowledge.but at present there was nothing more to be said.
mr. woodhousevery soon followed them into the drawingroom.
to be sittinglong after dinner was a confinement that he could not endure.neither wine nor conversation was any thing to him and gladly didhe move to those with whom he was always comfortable.while he talked to isabella however emma found an opportunityof sayingand so you do not consider this visit from your son as by anymeans certain.
i am sorry for it.
the introduction must be unpleasantwhenever it takes place and the sooner it could be over the better.yes and every delay makes one more apprehensive of other delays.even if this family the braithwaites are put off i am stillafraid that some excuse may be found for disappointing us.i cannot bear to imagine any reluctance on his side but i am surethere is a great wish on the churchills to keep him to themselves.there is jealousy.
they are jealous even of his regard for his father.in short i can feel no dependence on his coming and i wish mr. westonwere less sanguine.he ought to come said emma.
if he could stay only a coupleof days he ought to come and one can hardly conceive a young mansnot having it in his power to do as much as that.
a young womanif she fall into bad hands may be teazed and kept at a distancefrom those she wants to be with but one cannot comprehend a youngmans being under such restraint as not to be able to spend a weekwith his father if he likes it.one ought to be at enscombe and know the ways of the familybefore one decides upon what he can do replied mrs. weston.one ought to use the same caution perhaps in judging of theconduct of any one individual of any one family but enscombei believe certainly must not be judged by general rulesshe is so very unreasonable and every thing gives way to her.but she is so fond of the nephew  he is so very great a favourite.now according to my idea of mrs. churchill it would be most naturalthat while she makes no sacrifice for the comfort of the husbandto whom she owes every thing while she exercises incessant capricetowards him she should frequently be governed by the nephewto whom she owes nothing at all.my dearest emma do not pretend with your sweet temperto understand a bad one or to lay down rules for it  you mustlet it go its own way.
i have no doubt of his having at timesconsiderable influence but it may be perfectly impossible for himto know beforehand when it will be.emma listened and then coolly said i shall not be satisfiedunless he comes.he may have a great deal of influence on some pointscontinued mrs. weston and on others very little  and among thoseon which she is beyond his reach it is but too likely may bethis very circumstance of his coming away from them to visit us.chapter xvmr.
woodhouse was soon ready for his tea and when he had drank histea he was quite ready to go home and it was as much as his threecompanions could do to entertain away his notice of the latenessof the hour before the other gentlemen appeared.
mr. weston waschatty and convivial and no friend to early separations of any sortbut at last the drawingroom party did receive an augmentation.mr.
elton in very good spirits was one of the first to walk in.mrs.
weston and emma were sitting together on a sofa.
he joinedthem immediately and with scarcely an invitation seated himselfbetween them.emma in good spirits too from the amusement afforded her mindby the expectation of mr. frank churchill was willing to forgethis late improprieties and be as well satisfied with him as beforeand on his making harriet his very first subject was ready to listenwith most friendly smiles.he professed himself extremely anxious about her fair friendher fair lovely amiable friend.
did she knowhad sheheard any thing about her since their being at randallshe felt much anxietyhe must confess that the nature of hercomplaint alarmed him considerably.
and in this style he talkedon for some time very properly not much attending to any answerbut altogether sufficiently awake to the terror of a bad sore throatand emma was quite in charity with him.but at last there seemed a perverse turn it seemed all at once as ifhe were more afraid of its being a bad sore throat on her accountthan on harrietsmore anxious that she should escape the infectionthan that there should be no infection in the complaint.
he beganwith great earnestness to entreat her to refrain from visitingthe sickchamber again for the presentto entreat her to promisehim not to venture into such hazard till he had seen mr. perryand learnt his opinion and though she tried to laugh it offand bring the subject back into its proper course there was noputting an end to his extreme solicitude about her.
she was vexed.it did appearthere was no concealing itexactly like the pretenceof being in love with her instead of harriet an inconstancyif real the most contemptible and abominable and she had difficultyin behaving with temper.
he turned to mrs. weston to imploreher assistance would not she give him her supportwould not sheadd her persuasions to his to induce miss woodhouse not to goto mrs. goddards till it were certain that miss smiths disorderhad no infection  he could not be satisfied without a promisewould not she give him her influence in procuring itso scrupulous for others he continued and yet so carelessfor herself  she wanted me to nurse my cold by staying at home todayand yet will not promise to avoid the danger of catching an ulceratedsore throat herself.
is this fair mrs. westonjudge between us.have not i some right to complain  i am sure of your kind supportand aid.emma saw mrs. westons surprize and felt that it must be greatat an address which in words and manner was assuming to himselfthe right of first interest in her and as for herself she wastoo much provoked and offended to have the power of directlysaying any thing to the purpose.
she could only give him a lookbut it was such a look as she thought must restore him to his sensesand then left the sofa removing to a seat by her sister and givingher all her attention.she had not time to know how mr. elton took the reproof so rapidlydid another subject succeed for mr. john knightley now cameinto the room from examining the weather and opened on themall with the information of the ground being covered with snowand of its still snowing fast with a strong drifting windconcluding with these words to mr. woodhousethis will prove a spirited beginning of your winter engagementssir.
something new for your coachman and horses to be makingtheir way through a storm of snow.poor mr. woodhouse was silent from consternation but every body elsehad something to say every body was either surprized or not surprizedand had some question to ask or some comfort to offer.
mrs. westonand emma tried earnestly to cheer him and turn his attentionfrom his soninlaw who was pursuing his triumph rather unfeelingly.i admired your resolution very much sir said he in venturingout in such weather for of course you saw there would be snowvery soon.
every body must have seen the snow coming on.i admired your spirit and i dare say we shall get home very well.another hour or twos snow can hardly make the road impassableand we are two carriages if one is blown over in the bleak partof the common field there will be the other at hand.
i dare say weshall be all safe at hartfield before midnight.mr.
weston with triumph of a different sort was confessing that hehad known it to be snowing some time but had not said a wordlest it should make mr. woodhouse uncomfortable and be an excusefor his hurrying away.
as to there being any quantity of snow fallenor likely to fall to impede their return that was a mere jokehe was afraid they would find no difficulty.
he wished the road mightbe impassable that he might be able to keep them all at randallsand with the utmost goodwill was sure that accommodation mightbe found for every body calling on his wife to agree with himthat with a little contrivance every body might be lodgedwhich she hardly knew how to do from the consciousness of therebeing but two spare rooms in the house.what is to be done my dear emmawhat is to be donewas mr. woodhouses first exclamation and all that he could sayfor some time.
to her he looked for comfort and her assurancesof safety her representation of the excellence of the horsesand of james and of their having so many friends about themrevived him a little.his eldest daughters alarm was equal to his own.
the horror ofbeing blocked up at randalls while her children were at hartfieldwas full in her imagination and fancying the road to be now justpassable for adventurous people but in a state that admitted no delayshe was eager to have it settled that her father and emma should remainat randalls while she and her husband set forward instantly throughall the possible accumulations of drifted snow that might impede them.you had better order the carriage directly my love said shei dare say we shall be able to get along if we set off directlyand if we do come to any thing very bad i can get out and walk.i am not at all afraid.
i should not mind walking half the way.i could change my shoes you know the moment i got home and it is notthe sort of thing that gives me cold.indeed replied he.
then my dear isabella it is the mostextraordinary sort of thing in the world for in general everything does give you cold.
walk homeyou are prettily shodfor walking home i dare say.
it will be bad enough for the horses.isabella turned to mrs. weston for her approbation of the plan.mrs.
weston could only approve.
isabella then went to emmabut emma could not so entirely give up the hope of their beingall able to get away and they were still discussing the pointwhen mr. knightley who had left the room immediately after hisbrothers first report of the snow came back again and told themthat he had been out of doors to examine and could answer for therenot being the smallest difficulty in their getting home whenever theyliked it either now or an hour hence.
he had gone beyond the sweepsome way along the highbury roadthe snow was nowhere above halfan inch deepin many places hardly enough to whiten the grounda very few flakes were falling at present but the clouds were partingand there was every appearance of its being soon over.
he had seenthe coachmen and they both agreed with him in there being nothingto apprehend.to isabella the relief of such tidings was very great and theywere scarcely less acceptable to emma on her fathers accountwho was immediately set as much at ease on the subject as his nervousconstitution allowed but the alarm that had been raised could notbe appeased so as to admit of any comfort for him while he continuedat randalls.
he was satisfied of there being no present danger inreturning home but no assurances could convince him that it was safeto stay and while the others were variously urging and recommendingmr.
knightley and emma settled it in a few brief sentences  thusyour father will not be easy why do not you goi am ready if the others are.shall i ring the bellyes do.and the bell was rung and the carriages spoken for.
a fewminutes more and emma hoped to see one troublesome companiondeposited in his own house to get sober and cool and the otherrecover his temper and happiness when this visit of hardship were over.the carriage came  and mr. woodhouse always the first object onsuch occasions was carefully attended to his own by mr. knightleyand mr. weston but not all that either could say could prevent somerenewal of alarm at the sight of the snow which had actually fallenand the discovery of a much darker night than he had been prepared for.he was afraid they should have a very bad drive.
he was afraidpoor isabella would not like it.
and there would be poor emmain the carriage behind.
he did not know what they had best do.they must keep as much together as they could and james was talked toand given a charge to go very slow and wait for the other carriage.isabella stept in after her father john knightley forgetting that hedid not belong to their party stept in after his wife very naturallyso that emma found on being escorted and followed into the secondcarriage by mr. elton that the door was to be lawfully shut on themand that they were to have a teteatete drive.
it would not have beenthe awkwardness of a moment it would have been rather a pleasureprevious to the suspicions of this very day she could have talkedto him of harriet and the threequarters of a mile would haveseemed but one.
but now she would rather it had not happened.she believed he had been drinking too much of mr. westons good wineand felt sure that he would want to be talking nonsense.to restrain him as much as might be by her own manners she wasimmediately preparing to speak with exquisite calmness and gravityof the weather and the night but scarcely had she begun scarcely hadthey passed the sweepgate and joined the other carriage than shefound her subject cut upher hand seizedher attention demandedand mr. elton actually making violent love to her  availing himselfof the precious opportunity declaring sentiments which must be alreadywell known hopingfearingadoringready to die if she refused himbut flattering himself that his ardent attachment and unequalledlove and unexampled passion could not fail of having some effectand in short very much resolved on being seriously accepted as soonas possible.
it really was so.
without scruplewithout apologywithout much apparent diffidence mr. elton the lover of harrietwas professing himself her lover.
she tried to stop him but vainlyhe would go on and say it all.
angry as she was the thought ofthe moment made her resolve to restrain herself when she did speak.she felt that half this folly must be drunkenness and thereforecould hope that it might belong only to the passing hour.accordingly with a mixture of the serious and the playful which shehoped would best suit his half and half state she repliedi am very much astonished mr. elton.
this to me you forget yourselfyou take me for my friendany message to miss smith i shallbe happy to deliver but no more of this to me if you please.miss smithmessage to miss smithwhat could she possibly meanand he repeated her words with such assurance of accent such boastfulpretence of amazement that she could not help replying with quicknessmr.
elton this is the most extraordinary conduct and i can accountfor it only in one way you are not yourself or you could not speakeither to me or of harriet in such a manner.
command yourselfenough to say no more and i will endeavour to forget it.but mr. elton had only drunk wine enough to elevate his spiritsnot at all to confuse his intellects.
he perfectly knew his own meaningand having warmly protested against her suspicion as most injuriousand slightly touched upon his respect for miss smith as her friendbut acknowledging his wonder that miss smith should be mentionedat allhe resumed the subject of his own passion and was veryurgent for a favourable answer.as she thought less of his inebriety she thought more of his inconstancyand presumption and with fewer struggles for politeness repliedit is impossible for me to doubt any longer.
you have madeyourself too clear.
mr. elton my astonishment is much beyondany thing i can express.
after such behaviour as i have witnessedduring the last month to miss smithsuch attentions as ihave been in the daily habit of observingto be addressing mein this mannerthis is an unsteadiness of character indeedwhich i had not supposed possible  believe me sir i am farvery far from gratified in being the object of such professions.good heaven cried mr. elton what can be the meaning of thismiss smithi never thought of miss smith in the whole courseof my existencenever paid her any attentions but as your friendnever cared whether she were dead or alive but as your friend.if she has fancied otherwise her own wishes have misled herand i am very sorryextremely sorrybut miss smith indeedohmiss woodhouse who can think of miss smith when miss woodhouseis near  no upon my honour there is no unsteadiness of character.i have thought only of you.
i protest against having paid the smallestattention to any one else.
every thing that i have said or donefor many weeks past has been with the sole view of marking myadoration of yourself.
you cannot really seriously doubt it.noin an accent meant to be insinuatingi am sure you have seenand understood me.it would be impossible to say what emma felt on hearing thiswhich of all her unpleasant sensations was uppermost.
she wastoo completely overpowered to be immediately able to replyand two moments of silence being ample encouragement for mr. eltonssanguine state of mind he tried to take her hand again as hejoyously exclaimedcharming miss woodhouse allow me to interpret this interesting silence.it confesses that you have long understood me.no sir cried emma it confesses no such thing.
so far fromhaving long understood you i have been in a most complete errorwith respect to your views till this moment.
as to myself i amvery sorry that you should have been giving way to any feelingsnothing could be farther from my wishesyour attachment to myfriend harrietyour pursuit of her pursuit it appeared gave megreat pleasure and i have been very earnestly wishing you successbut had i supposed that she were not your attraction to hartfieldi should certainly have thought you judged ill in making your visitsso frequent.
am i to believe that you have never sought to recommendyourself particularly to miss smiththat you have never thoughtseriously of hernever madam cried he affronted in his turn  never i assure you.i think seriously of miss smithmiss smith is a very good sortof girl and i should be happy to see her respectably settled.i wish her extremely well  and no doubt there are men who might notobject toevery body has their level  but as for myself i am noti think quite so much at a loss.
i need not so totally despairof an equal alliance as to be addressing myself to miss smithno madam my visits to hartfield have been for yourself onlyand the encouragement i receivedencouragementi give you encouragementsir you have been entirelymistaken in supposing it.
i have seen you only as the admirerof my friend.
in no other light could you have been more to me thana common acquaintance.
i am exceedingly sorry  but it is well thatthe mistake ends where it does.
had the same behaviour continuedmiss smith might have been led into a misconception of your viewsnot being aware probably any more than myself of the verygreat inequality which you are so sensible of.
but as it isthe disappointment is single and i trust will not be lasting.i have no thoughts of matrimony at present.he was too angry to say another word her manner too decidedto invite supplication and in this state of swelling resentmentand mutually deep mortification they had to continue together a fewminutes longer for the fears of mr. woodhouse had confined themto a footpace.
if there had not been so much anger there would havebeen desperate awkwardness but their straightforward emotions leftno room for the little zigzags of embarrassment.
without knowingwhen the carriage turned into vicarage lane or when it stoppedthey found themselves all at once at the door of his houseand he was out before another syllable passed.emma then felt itindispensable to wish him a good night.
the compliment was just returnedcoldly and proudly and under indescribable irritation of spiritsshe was then conveyed to hartfield.there she was welcomed with the utmost delight by her fatherwho had been trembling for the dangers of a solitary drive fromvicarage laneturning a corner which he could never bear to think ofand in strange handsa mere common coachmanno james and there itseemed as if her return only were wanted to make every thing go wellfor mr. john knightley ashamed of his illhumour was now allkindness and attention and so particularly solicitous for the comfortof her father as to seemif not quite ready to join him in a basinof gruelperfectly sensible of its being exceedingly wholesomeand the day was concluding in peace and comfort to all their little partyexcept herself.but her mind had never been in such perturbationand it needed a very strong effort to appear attentive and cheerful tillthe usual hour of separating allowed her the relief of quiet reflection.chapter xvithe hair was curled and the maid sent away and emma sat down to thinkand be miserable.it was a wretched business indeedsuch an overthrowof every thing she had been wishing forsuch a development of everything most unwelcomesuch a blow for harrietthat was the worstof all.
every part of it brought pain and humiliation of some sortor other but compared with the evil to harriet all was lightand she would gladly have submitted to feel yet more mistakenmore in errormore disgraced by misjudgment than she actually wascould the effects of her blunders have been confined to herself.if i had not persuaded harriet into liking the man i could haveborne any thing.
he might have doubled his presumption to mebut poor harriethow she could have been so deceivedhe protested that hehad never thought seriously of harrietnever  she looked backas well as she could but it was all confusion.
she had takenup the idea she supposed and made every thing bend to it.his manners however must have been unmarked wavering dubiousor she could not have been so misled.the picturehow eager he had been about the pictureand the charadeand an hundred other circumstanceshow clearly they had seemed to point at harriet.
to be surethe charade with its ready witbut then the soft eyesin fact it suited neither it was a jumble without taste or truth.who could have seen through such thickheaded nonsensecertainly she had often especially of late thought his mannersto herself unnecessarily gallant but it had passed as his wayas a mere error of judgment of knowledge of taste as one proofamong others that he had not always lived in the best societythat with all the gentleness of his address true elegancewas sometimes wanting but till this very day she had neverfor an instant suspected it to mean any thing but grateful respectto her as harriets friend.to mr. john knightley was she indebted for her first idea onthe subject for the first start of its possibility.
there wasno denying that those brothers had penetration.
she rememberedwhat mr. knightley had once said to her about mr. elton the cautionhe had given the conviction he had professed that mr. elton wouldnever marry indiscreetly and blushed to think how much truera knowledge of his character had been there shewn than any shehad reached herself.
it was dreadfully mortifying but mr. eltonwas proving himself in many respects the very reverse of what shehad meant and believed him proud assuming conceited very fullof his own claims and little concerned about the feelings of others.contrary to the usual course of things mr. eltons wantingto pay his addresses to her had sunk him in her opinion.his professions and his proposals did him no service.
she thoughtnothing of his attachment and was insulted by his hopes.he wanted to marry well and having the arrogance to raise hiseyes to her pretended to be in love but she was perfectly easyas to his not suffering any disappointment that need be cared for.there had been no real affection either in his language or manners.sighs and fine words had been given in abundance but she couldhardly devise any set of expressions or fancy any tone of voiceless allied with real love.
she need not trouble herself to pity him.he only wanted to aggrandise and enrich himself and if miss woodhouseof hartfield the heiress of thirty thousand pounds were not quiteso easily obtained as he had fancied he would soon try for misssomebody else with twenty or with ten.butthat he should talk of encouragement should consider her asaware of his views accepting his attentions meaning in shortto marry himshould suppose himself her equal in connexionor mindlook down upon her friend so well understanding thegradations of rank below him and be so blind to what rose aboveas to fancy himself shewing no presumption in addressing herit was most provoking.perhaps it was not fair to expect him to feel how very much hewas her inferior in talent and all the elegancies of mind.the very want of such equality might prevent his perception of itbut he must know that in fortune and consequence she was greatlyhis superior.
he must know that the woodhouses had been settledfor several generations at hartfield the younger branchof a very ancient familyand that the eltons were nobody.the landed property of hartfield certainly was inconsiderablebeing but a sort of notch in the donwell abbey estate to which allthe rest of highbury belonged but their fortune from other sourceswas such as to make them scarcely secondary to donwell abbey itselfin every other kind of consequence and the woodhouses had longheld a high place in the consideration of the neighbourhood whichmr.
elton had first entered not two years ago to make his wayas he could without any alliances but in trade or any thingto recommend him to notice but his situation and his civility.but he had fancied her in love with him that evidently musthave been his dependence and after raving a little about theseeming incongruity of gentle manners and a conceited heademma was obliged in common honesty to stop and admit that her ownbehaviour to him had been so complaisant and obliging so full ofcourtesy and attention as supposing her real motive unperceivedmight warrant a man of ordinary observation and delicacylike mr. elton in fancying himself a very decided favourite.
if shehad so misinterpreted his feelings she had little right to wonderthat he with selfinterest to blind him should have mistaken hers.the first error and the worst lay at her door.
it was foolishit was wrong to take so active a part in bringing any twopeople together.
it was adventuring too far assuming too muchmaking light of what ought to be serious a trick of what oughtto be simple.
she was quite concerned and ashamed and resolvedto do such things no more.here have i said she actually talked poor harriet into beingvery much attached to this man.
she might never have thought of himbut for me and certainly never would have thought of him with hopeif i had not assured her of his attachment for she is as modestand humble as i used to think him.
oh that i had been satisfied withpersuading her not to accept young martin.
there i was quite right.that was well done of me but there i should have stopped and leftthe rest to time and chance.
i was introducing her into good companyand giving her the opportunity of pleasing some one worth havingi ought not to have attempted more.
but now poor girl her peaceis cut up for some time.
i have been but half a friend to herand if she were not to feel this disappointment so very much i amsure i have not an idea of any body else who would be at all desirablefor herwilliam coxeoh no i could not endure william coxea pert young lawyer.she stopt to blush and laugh at her own relapse and then resumeda more serious more dispiriting cogitation upon what had beenand might be and must be.
the distressing explanation she hadto make to harriet and all that poor harriet would be sufferingwith the awkwardness of future meetings the difficulties ofcontinuing or discontinuing the acquaintance of subduing feelingsconcealing resentment and avoiding eclat were enough to occupyher in most unmirthful reflections some time longer and she wentto bed at last with nothing settled but the conviction of her havingblundered most dreadfully.to youth and natural cheerfulness like emmas though undertemporary gloom at night the return of day will hardly failto bring return of spirits.
the youth and cheerfulness of morningare in happy analogy and of powerful operation and if thedistress be not poignant enough to keep the eyes unclosed theywill be sure to open to sensations of softened pain and brighter hope.emma got up on the morrow more disposed for comfort than she hadgone to bed more ready to see alleviations of the evil before herand to depend on getting tolerably out of it.it was a great consolation that mr. elton should not be reallyin love with her or so particularly amiable as to make it shockingto disappoint himthat harriets nature should not be of thatsuperior sort in which the feelings are most acute and retentiveand that there could be no necessity for any bodys knowingwhat had passed except the three principals and especiallyfor her fathers being given a moments uneasiness about it.these were very cheering thoughts and the sight of a great dealof snow on the ground did her further service for any thing waswelcome that might justify their all three being quite asunderat present.the weather was most favourable for her though christmas dayshe could not go to church.
mr. woodhouse would have been miserablehad his daughter attempted it and she was therefore safe fromeither exciting or receiving unpleasant and most unsuitable ideas.the ground covered with snow and the atmosphere in that unsettledstate between frost and thaw which is of all others the mostunfriendly for exercise every morning beginning in rain or snowand every evening setting in to freeze she was for many days a mosthonourable prisoner.
no intercourse with harriet possible but by noteno church for her on sunday any more than on christmas day and noneed to find excuses for mr. eltons absenting himself.it was weather which might fairly confine every body at homeand though she hoped and believed him to be really taking comfortin some society or other it was very pleasant to have her fatherso well satisfied with his being all alone in his own housetoo wise to stir out and to hear him say to mr. knightley whom noweather could keep entirely from themah  mr. knightley why do not you stay at home like poor mr. eltonthese days of confinement would have been but for her privateperplexities remarkably comfortable as such seclusion exactlysuited her brother whose feelings must always be of great importanceto his companions and he had besides so thoroughly cleared offhis illhumour at randalls that his amiableness never failed himduring the rest of his stay at hartfield.
he was always agreeableand obliging and speaking pleasantly of every body.
but with allthe hopes of cheerfulness and all the present comfort of delaythere was still such an evil hanging over her in the hour of explanationwith harriet as made it impossible for emma to be ever perfectly at ease.chapter xviimr.
and mrs. john knightley were not detained long at hartfield.the weather soon improved enough for those to move who must moveand mr. woodhouse having as usual tried to persuade his daughterto stay behind with all her children was obliged to see the wholeparty set off and return to his lamentations over the destinyof poor isabellawhich poor isabella passing her life withthose she doated on full of their merits blind to their faultsand always innocently busy might have been a model of rightfeminine happiness.the evening of the very day on which they went brought a notefrom mr. elton to mr. woodhouse a long civil ceremonious noteto say with mr. eltons best compliments that he was proposingto leave highbury the following morning in his way to bathwhere in compliance with the pressing entreaties of some friendshe had engaged to spend a few weeks and very much regrettedthe impossibility he was under from various circumstances ofweather and business of taking a personal leave of mr. woodhouseof whose friendly civilities he should ever retain a grateful senseand had mr. woodhouse any commands should be happy to attend to them.emma was most agreeably surprized.mr.
eltons absence justat this time was the very thing to be desired.
she admiredhim for contriving it though not able to give him much creditfor the manner in which it was announced.
resentment could nothave been more plainly spoken than in a civility to her fatherfrom which she was so pointedly excluded.
she had not even ashare in his opening compliments.her name was not mentionedand there was so striking a change in all this and such anilljudged solemnity of leavetaking in his graceful acknowledgmentsas she thought at first could not escape her fathers suspicion.it did however.her father was quite taken up with the surprizeof so sudden a journey and his fears that mr. elton might never getsafely to the end of it and saw nothing extraordinary in his language.it was a very useful note for it supplied them with fresh matterfor thought and conversation during the rest of their lonely evening.mr.
woodhouse talked over his alarms and emma was in spiritsto persuade them away with all her usual promptitude.she now resolved to keep harriet no longer in the dark.
she hadreason to believe her nearly recovered from her cold and it wasdesirable that she should have as much time as possible for gettingthe better of her other complaint before the gentlemans return.she went to mrs. goddards accordingly the very next day to undergothe necessary penance of communication and a severe one it was.she had to destroy all the hopes which she had been so industriouslyfeedingto appear in the ungracious character of the one preferredand acknowledge herself grossly mistaken and misjudging in all herideas on one subject all her observations all her convictionsall her prophecies for the last six weeks.the confession completely renewed her first shameand the sightof harriets tears made her think that she should never be in charitywith herself again.harriet bore the intelligence very wellblaming nobodyand in every thing testifying such an ingenuousness of dispositionand lowly opinion of herself as must appear with particularadvantage at that moment to her friend.emma was in the humour to value simplicity and modesty to the utmostand all that was amiable all that ought to be attachingseemed on harriets side not her own.
harriet did not considerherself as having any thing to complain of.
the affection of sucha man as mr. elton would have been too great a distinction.she never could have deserved himand nobody but so partialand kind a friend as miss woodhouse would have thought it possible.her tears fell abundantlybut her grief was so truly artlessthat no dignity could have made it more respectable in emmas eyesand she listened to her and tried to console her with all her heartand understandingreally for the time convinced that harriet wasthe superior creature of the twoand that to resemble her wouldbe more for her own welfare and happiness than all that genius orintelligence could do.it was rather too late in the day to set about being simplemindedand ignorant but she left her with every previous resolutionconfirmed of being humble and discreet and repressing imaginationall the rest of her life.
her second duty now inferior only to herfathers claims was to promote harriets comfort and endeavourto prove her own affection in some better method than by matchmaking.she got her to hartfield and shewed her the most unvarying kindnessstriving to occupy and amuse her and by books and conversationto drive mr. elton from her thoughts.time she knew must be allowed for this being thoroughly done and shecould suppose herself but an indifferent judge of such matters in generaland very inadequate to sympathise in an attachment to mr. eltonin particular but it seemed to her reasonable that at harriets ageand with the entire extinction of all hope such a progress might bemade towards a state of composure by the time of mr. eltons returnas to allow them all to meet again in the common routine of acquaintancewithout any danger of betraying sentiments or increasing them.harriet did think him all perfection and maintained the nonexistenceof any body equal to him in person or goodnessand did in truthprove herself more resolutely in love than emma had foreseenbut yet it appeared to her so natural so inevitable to striveagainst an inclination of that sort unrequited that she could notcomprehend its continuing very long in equal force.if mr. elton on his return made his own indifference as evidentand indubitable as she could not doubt he would anxiously doshe could not imagine harriets persisting to place her happinessin the sight or the recollection of him.their being fixed so absolutely fixed in the same place was badfor each for all three.
not one of them had the power of removalor of effecting any material change of society.
they must encountereach other and make the best of it.harriet was farther unfortunate in the tone of her companions atmrs.
goddards mr. elton being the adoration of all the teachersand great girls in the school and it must be at hartfield onlythat she could have any chance of hearing him spoken of with coolingmoderation or repellent truth.
where the wound had been giventhere must the cure be found if anywhere and emma felt thattill she saw her in the way of cure there could be no true peacefor herself.chapter xviiimr.
frank churchill did not come.
when the time proposeddrew near mrs. westons fears were justified in the arrivalof a letter of excuse.
for the present he could not be sparedto his very great mortification and regret but still he lookedforward with the hope of coming to randalls at no distant period.mrs.
weston was exceedingly disappointedmuch more disappointedin fact than her husband though her dependence on seeing theyoung man had been so much more sober  but a sanguine temperthough for ever expecting more good than occurs does notalways pay for its hopes by any proportionate depression.it soon flies over the present failure and begins to hope again.for half an hour mr. weston was surprized and sorry but then hebegan to perceive that franks coming two or three months laterwould be a much better plan better time of year better weatherand that he would be able without any doubt to stay considerablylonger with them than if he had come sooner.these feelings rapidly restored his comfort while mrs. westonof a more apprehensive disposition foresaw nothing but a repetitionof excuses and delays and after all her concern for what her husbandwas to suffer suffered a great deal more herself.emma was not at this time in a state of spirits to care reallyabout mr. frank churchills not coming except as a disappointmentat randalls.
the acquaintance at present had no charm for her.she wanted rather to be quiet and out of temptation but still as itwas desirable that she should appear in general like her usual selfshe took care to express as much interest in the circumstanceand enter as warmly into mr. and mrs. westons disappointmentas might naturally belong to their friendship.she was the first to announce it to mr. knightley and exclaimedquite as much as was necessary or being acting a part perhapsrather more at the conduct of the churchills in keeping him away.she then proceeded to say a good deal more than she felt of theadvantage of such an addition to their confined society in surrythe pleasure of looking at somebody new the galaday to highbury entirewhich the sight of him would have made and ending with reflectionson the churchills again found herself directly involved in adisagreement with mr. knightley and to her great amusementperceived that she was taking the other side of the question from herreal opinion and making use of mrs. westons arguments against herself.the churchills are very likely in fault said mr. knightleycoolly but i dare say he might come if he would.i do not know why you should say so.
he wishes exceedingly to comebut his uncle and aunt will not spare him.i cannot believe that he has not the power of coming if he madea point of it.
it is too unlikely for me to believe it without proof.how odd you are  what has mr. frank churchill done to make yousuppose him such an unnatural creaturei am not supposing him at all an unnatural creature in suspectingthat he may have learnt to be above his connexions and to carevery little for any thing but his own pleasure from living withthose who have always set him the example of it.
it is a great dealmore natural than one could wish that a young man brought upby those who are proud luxurious and selfish should be proudluxurious and selfish too.
if frank churchill had wanted to seehis father he would have contrived it between september and january.a man at his agewhat is hethree or fourandtwentycannot bewithout the means of doing as much as that.
it is impossible.thats easily said and easily felt by you who have alwaysbeen your own master.
you are the worst judge in the worldmr.
knightley of the difficulties of dependence.
you do not knowwhat it is to have tempers to manage.it is not to be conceived that a man of three or fourandtwentyshould not have liberty of mind or limb to that amount.
he cannotwant moneyhe cannot want leisure.
we know on the contrarythat he has so much of both that he is glad to get rid of them atthe idlest haunts in the kingdom.
we hear of him for ever at somewateringplace or other.
a little while ago he was at weymouth.this proves that he can leave the churchills.yes sometimes he can.and those times are whenever he thinks it worth his whilewhenever there is any temptation of pleasure.it is very unfair to judge of any bodys conduct without anintimate knowledge of their situation.
nobody who has not beenin the interior of a family can say what the difficultiesof any individual of that family may be.
we ought to beacquainted with enscombe and with mrs. churchills temperbefore we pretend to decide upon what her nephew can do.he may at times be able to do a great deal more than he can at others.there is one thing emma which a man can always do if he chusesand that is his duty not by manoeuvring and finessing but by vigourand resolution.
it is frank churchills duty to pay this attentionto his father.
he knows it to be so by his promises and messagesbut if he wished to do it it might be done.
a man who felt rightlywould say at once simply and resolutely to mrs. churchillevery sacrifice of mere pleasure you will always find me ready to maketo your convenience but i must go and see my father immediately.i know he would be hurt by my failing in such a mark of respect to himon the present occasion.
i shall therefore set off tomorrow.if he would say so to her at once in the tone of decision becominga man there would be no opposition made to his going.no said emma laughing but perhaps there might be some made to hiscoming back again.
such language for a young man entirely dependentto usenobody but you mr. knightley would imagine it possible.but you have not an idea of what is requisite in situations directlyopposite to your own.
mr. frank churchill to be making sucha speech as that to the uncle and aunt who have brought him upand are to provide for himstanding up in the middle of the roomi suppose and speaking as loud as he couldhow can you imaginesuch conduct practicabledepend upon it emma a sensible man would find no difficulty in it.he would feel himself in the right and the declarationmadeof course as a man of sense would make it in a proper mannerwould do him more good raise him higher fix his interest strongerwith the people he depended on than all that a line of shiftsand expedients can ever do.
respect would be added to affection.they would feel that they could trust him that the nephew who haddone rightly by his father would do rightly by them for they knowas well as he does as well as all the world must know that heought to pay this visit to his father and while meanly exertingtheir power to delay it are in their hearts not thinking the betterof him for submitting to their whims.
respect for right conductis felt by every body.
if he would act in this sort of manneron principle consistently regularly their little minds would bendto his.i rather doubt that.
you are very fond of bending little mindsbut where little minds belong to rich people in authorityi think they have a knack of swelling out till they are quite asunmanageable as great ones.
i can imagine that if you as you aremr.
knightley were to be transported and placed all at once inmr.
frank churchills situation you would be able to say and dojust what you have been recommending for him and it might havea very good effect.
the churchills might not have a word to sayin return but then you would have no habits of early obedienceand long observance to break through.
to him who has it mightnot be so easy to burst forth at once into perfect independenceand set all their claims on his gratitude and regard at nought.he may have as strong a sense of what would be right as you can havewithout being so equal under particular circumstances to act upto it.then it would not be so strong a sense.
if it failed to produceequal exertion it could not be an equal conviction.oh the difference of situation and habit  i wish you would tryto understand what an amiable young man may be likely to feelin directly opposing those whom as child and boy he has beenlooking up to all his life.our amiable young man is a very weak young man if this be the firstoccasion of his carrying through a resolution to do right againstthe will of others.
it ought to have been a habit with him bythis time of following his duty instead of consulting expediency.i can allow for the fears of the child but not of the man.as he became rational he ought to have roused himself and shaken offall that was unworthy in their authority.
he ought to have opposedthe first attempt on their side to make him slight his father.had he begun as he ought there would have been no difficulty now.we shall never agree about him cried emma but that isnothing extraordinary.
i have not the least idea of his beinga weak young man  i feel sure that he is not.
mr. weston wouldnot be blind to folly though in his own son but he is very likelyto have a more yielding complying mild disposition than would suityour notions of mans perfection.
i dare say he has and thoughit may cut him off from some advantages it will secure him many others.yes all the advantages of sitting still when he ought to moveand of leading a life of mere idle pleasure and fancying himselfextremely expert in finding excuses for it.
he can sit down andwrite a fine flourishing letter full of professions and falsehoodsand persuade himself that he has hit upon the very best methodin the world of preserving peace at home and preventing his fathershaving any right to complain.
his letters disgust me.your feelings are singular.
they seem to satisfy every body else.i suspect they do not satisfy mrs. weston.
they hardly cansatisfy a woman of her good sense and quick feelings  standing ina mothers place but without a mothers affection to blind her.it is on her account that attention to randalls is doubly dueand she must doubly feel the omission.
had she been a personof consequence herself he would have come i dare say and it wouldnot have signified whether he did or no.
can you think your friendbehindhand in these sort of considerations  do you suppose shedoes not often say all this to herself  no emma your amiableyoung man can be amiable only in french not in english.
he may bevery aimable have very good manners and be very agreeable but hecan have no english delicacy towards the feelings of other peoplenothing really amiable about him.you seem determined to think ill of him.menot at all replied mr. knightley rather displeased i donot want to think ill of him.
i should be as ready to acknowledgehis merits as any other man but i hear of none except what aremerely personal that he is wellgrown and goodlooking with smoothplausible manners.well if he have nothing else to recommend him he will be atreasure at highbury.
we do not often look upon fine young menwellbred and agreeable.
we must not be nice and ask for allthe virtues into the bargain.
cannot you imagine mr. knightleywhat a sensation his coming will produce  there will be but one subjectthroughout the parishes of donwell and highbury but one interestone object of curiosity it will be all mr. frank churchillwe shall think and speak of nobody else.you will excuse my being so much overpowered.
if i find himconversable i shall be glad of his acquaintance but if he is onlya chattering coxcomb he will not occupy much of my time or thoughts.my idea of him is that he can adapt his conversation to the tasteof every body and has the power as well as the wish of beinguniversally agreeable.
to you he will talk of farming to meof drawing or music and so on to every body having that generalinformation on all subjects which will enable him to follow the leador take the lead just as propriety may require and to speakextremely well on each that is my idea of him.and mine said mr. knightley warmly is that if he turn out anything like it he will be the most insufferable fellow breathingwhat at threeandtwenty to be the king of his companythe great manthe practised politician who is to read every bodys characterand make every bodys talents conduce to the display of hisown superiority to be dispensing his flatteries around that hemay make all appear like fools compared with himself  my dear emmayour own good sense could not endure such a puppy when it cameto the point.i will say no more about him cried emma you turn everything to evil.
we are both prejudiced you against i for himand we have no chance of agreeing till he is really here.prejudiced  i am not prejudiced.but i am very much and without being at all ashamed of it.my love for mr. and mrs. weston gives me a decided prejudice inhis favour.he is a person i never think of from one months end to anothersaid mr. knightley with a degree of vexation which made emmaimmediately talk of something else though she could not comprehendwhy he should be angry.to take a dislike to a young man only because he appeared to beof a different disposition from himself was unworthy the realliberality of mind which she was always used to acknowledge in himfor with all the high opinion of himself which she had often laidto his charge she had never before for a moment supposed it couldmake him unjust to the merit of another.volume iichapter iemma and harriet had been walking together one morning andin emmas opinion had been talking enough of mr. elton for that day.she could not think that harriets solace or her own sins required moreand she was therefore industriously getting rid of the subjectas they returnedbut it burst out again when she thought shehad succeeded and after speaking some time of what the poor mustsuffer in winter and receiving no other answer than a very plaintivemr.
elton is so good to the poor she found something else must be done.they were just approaching the house where lived mrs. and miss bates.she determined to call upon them and seek safety in numbers.there was always sufficient reason for such an attention mrs. andmiss bates loved to be called on and she knew she was consideredby the very few who presumed ever to see imperfection in heras rather negligent in that respect and as not contributing what sheought to the stock of their scanty comforts.she had had many a hint from mr. knightley and some from her own heartas to her deficiencybut none were equal to counteract the persuasionof its being very disagreeablea waste of timetiresome womenand all the horror of being in danger of falling in with the secondrateand thirdrate of highbury who were calling on them for everand therefore she seldom went near them.
but now she made the suddenresolution of not passing their door without going inobservingas she proposed it to harriet that as well as she could calculatethey were just now quite safe from any letter from jane fairfax.the house belonged to people in business.
mrs. and miss bates occupiedthe drawingroom floor and there in the very moderatesized apartmentwhich was every thing to them the visitors were most cordiallyand even gratefully welcomed the quiet neat old lady who with herknitting was seated in the warmest corner wanting even to give upher place to miss woodhouse and her more active talking daughteralmost ready to overpower them with care and kindness thanks fortheir visit solicitude for their shoes anxious inquiries aftermr.
woodhouses health cheerful communications about her mothersand sweetcake from the beaufetmrs.
cole had just been therejust called in for ten minutes and had been so good as to sit anhour with them and she had taken a piece of cake and been so kindas to say she liked it very much and therefore she hoped misswoodhouse and miss smith would do them the favour to eat a piece too.the mention of the coles was sure to be followed by that of mr. elton.there was intimacy between them and mr. cole had heard frommr.
elton since his going away.
emma knew what was coming they musthave the letter over again and settle how long he had been goneand how much he was engaged in company and what a favourite hewas wherever he went and how full the master of the ceremoniesball had been and she went through it very well with all theinterest and all the commendation that could be requisite and alwaysputting forward to prevent harriets being obliged to say a word.this she had been prepared for when she entered the housebut meant having once talked him handsomely over to be no fartherincommoded by any troublesome topic and to wander at large amongstall the mistresses and misses of highbury and their cardparties.she had not been prepared to have jane fairfax succeed mr. eltonbut he was actually hurried off by miss bates she jumped awayfrom him at last abruptly to the coles to usher in a letter fromher niece.oh yesmr.
elton i understandcertainly as to dancingmrs.
cole was telling me that dancing at the rooms at bath wasmrs.
cole was so kind as to sit some time with us talking of janefor as soon as she came in she began inquiring after herjane is so very great a favourite there.
whenever she is with usmrs.
cole does not know how to shew her kindness enoughand i must say that jane deserves it as much as any body can.and so she began inquiring after her directly saying i know youcannot have heard from jane lately because it is not her timefor writing and when i immediately said but indeed we havewe had a letter this very morning i do not know that i ever sawany body more surprized.
have you upon your honour said shewell that is quite unexpected.
do let me hear what she says.emmas politeness was at hand directly to say with smiling interesthave you heard from miss fairfax so lately  i am extremely happy.i hope she is wellthank you.
you are so kind replied the happily deceived auntwhile eagerly hunting for the letter.oh here it is.
i was sureit could not be far off but i had put my huswife upon it you seewithout being aware and so it was quite hid but i had it in my handso very lately that i was almost sure it must be on the table.i was reading it to mrs. cole and since she went away i wasreading it again to my mother for it is such a pleasure to hera letter from janethat she can never hear it often enoughso i knew it could not be far off and here it is only just undermy huswifeand since you are so kind as to wish to hear whatshe saysbut first of all i really must in justice to janeapologise for her writing so short a letteronly two pages you seehardly twoand in general she fills the whole paper and crosses half.my mother often wonders that i can make it out so well.she often says when the letter is first opened well hettynow i think you will be put to it to make out all that checkerworkdont you maamand then i tell her i am sure she would contriveto make it out herself if she had nobody to do it for herevery word of iti am sure she would pore over it till she hadmade out every word.
and indeed though my mothers eyes are notso good as they were she can see amazingly well still thank godwith the help of spectacles.
it is such a blessing  my mothersare really very good indeed.
jane often says when she is herei am sure grandmama you must have had very strong eyes to seeas you doand so much fine work as you have done tooi only wishmy eyes may last me as well.all this spoken extremely fast obliged miss bates to stop for breathand emma said something very civil about the excellence of missfairfaxs handwriting.you are extremely kind replied miss bates highly gratifiedyou who are such a judge and write so beautifully yourself.i am sure there is nobodys praise that could give us so much pleasureas miss woodhouses.
my mother does not hear she is a little deafyou know.
maam addressing her do you hear what miss woodhouseis so obliging to say about janes handwritingand emma had the advantage of hearing her own silly complimentrepeated twice over before the good old lady could comprehend it.she was pondering in the meanwhile upon the possibility without seemingvery rude of making her escape from jane fairfaxs letter and hadalmost resolved on hurrying away directly under some slight excusewhen miss bates turned to her again and seized her attention.my mothers deafness is very trifling you seejust nothing at all.by only raising my voice and saying any thing two or three times overshe is sure to hear but then she is used to my voice.
but it is veryremarkable that she should always hear jane better than she does me.jane speaks so distinct  however she will not find her grandmamaat all deafer than she was two years ago which is saying a greatdeal at my mothers time of lifeand it really is full two yearsyou know since she was here.
we never were so long without seeingher before and as i was telling mrs. cole we shall hardly knowhow to make enough of her now.are you expecting miss fairfax here soonoh yes next week.indeedthat must be a very great pleasure.thank you.
you are very kind.
yes next week.
every body isso surprized and every body says the same obliging things.
i amsure she will be as happy to see her friends at highbury as theycan be to see her.
yes friday or saturday she cannot say whichbecause colonel campbell will be wanting the carriage himself oneof those days.
so very good of them to send her the whole waybut they always do you know.
oh yes friday or saturday next.that is what she writes about.
that is the reason of her writing outof rule as we call it for in the common course we should not haveheard from her before next tuesday or wednesday.yes so i imagined.
i was afraid there could be little chanceof my hearing any thing of miss fairfax today.so obliging of you  no we should not have heard if it had notbeen for this particular circumstance of her being to come hereso soon.
my mother is so delightedfor she is to be three monthswith us at least.
three months she says so positively as iam going to have the pleasure of reading to you.
the case isyou see that the campbells are going to ireland.
mrs. dixon haspersuaded her father and mother to come over and see her directly.they had not intended to go over till the summer but she is soimpatient to see them againfor till she married last octobershe was never away from them so much as a week which must makeit very strange to be in different kingdoms i was going to saybut however different countries and so she wrote a very urgent letterto her motheror her father i declare i do not know which it wasbut we shall see presently in janes letterwrote in mr. dixonsname as well as her own to press their coming over directlyand they would give them the meeting in dublin and take them backto their country seat balycraig a beautiful place i fancy.jane has heard a great deal of its beauty from mr. dixon i meani do not know that she ever heard about it from any body elsebut it was very natural you know that he should like to speakof his own place while he was paying his addressesand as jane usedto be very often walking out with themfor colonel and mrs. campbellwere very particular about their daughters not walking outoften with only mr. dixon for which i do not at all blame themof course she heard every thing he might be telling miss campbellabout his own home in ireland and i think she wrote us wordthat he had shewn them some drawings of the place views that hehad taken himself.
he is a most amiable charming young mani believe.
jane was quite longing to go to ireland from his accountof things.at this moment an ingenious and animating suspicion enteringemmas brain with regard to jane fairfax this charming mr. dixonand the not going to ireland she said with the insidious designof farther discoveryyou must feel it very fortunate that miss fairfax should be allowedto come to you at such a time.
considering the very particularfriendship between her and mrs. dixon you could hardly have expectedher to be excused from accompanying colonel and mrs. campbell.very true very true indeed.
the very thing that we have alwaysbeen rather afraid of for we should not have liked to have herat such a distance from us for months togethernot able to comeif any thing was to happen.
but you see every thing turns outfor the best.
they want her mr. and mrs. dixon excessively tocome over with colonel and mrs. campbell quite depend upon itnothing can be more kind or pressing than their joint invitationjane says as you will hear presently mr. dixon does not seem in theleast backward in any attention.
he is a most charming young man.ever since the service he rendered jane at weymouth when they wereout in that party on the water and she by the sudden whirlinground of something or other among the sails would have been dashedinto the sea at once and actually was all but gone if he had notwith the greatest presence of mind caught hold of her habiti can never think of it without tremblingbut ever since wehad the history of that day i have been so fond of mr. dixonbut in spite of all her friends urgency and her own wishof seeing ireland miss fairfax prefers devoting the time to youand mrs. batesyesentirely her own doing entirely her own choice and coloneland mrs. campbell think she does quite right just what theyshould recommend and indeed they particularly wish her to tryher native air as she has not been quite so well as usual lately.i am concerned to hear of it.
i think they judge wisely.but mrs. dixon must be very much disappointed.
mrs. dixoni understand has no remarkable degree of personal beauty is notby any means to be compared with miss fairfax.oh no.
you are very obliging to say such thingsbut certainly not.there is no comparison between them.
miss campbell always wasabsolutely plainbut extremely elegant and amiable.yes that of course.jane caught a bad cold poor thing so long ago as the thof november as i am going to read to you and has never beenwell since.
a long time is not it for a cold to hang upon hershe never mentioned it before because she would not alarm us.just like her so consideratebut however she is so far from wellthat her kind friends the campbells think she had better come homeand try an air that always agrees with her and they have no doubtthat three or four months at highbury will entirely cure herand it is certainly a great deal better that she should come herethan go to ireland if she is unwell.
nobody could nurse her as weshould do.it appears to me the most desirable arrangement in the world.and so she is to come to us next friday or saturday and thecampbells leave town in their way to holyhead the monday followingas you will find from janes letter.
so suddenyou may guessdear miss woodhouse what a flurry it has thrown me inif it was not for the drawback of her illnessbut i am afraidwe must expect to see her grown thin and looking very poorly.i must tell you what an unlucky thing happened to me as to that.i always make a point of reading janes letters through to myself firstbefore i read them aloud to my mother you know for fear of therebeing any thing in them to distress her.
jane desired me to do itso i always do  and so i began today with my usual cautionbut no sooner did i come to the mention of her being unwell than iburst out quite frightened with bless me poor jane is illwhich my mother being on the watch heard distinctly and was sadlyalarmed at.
however when i read on i found it was not near so badas i had fancied at first and i make so light of it now to herthat she does not think much about it.
but i cannot imaginehow i could be so off my guard.
if jane does not get well soonwe will call in mr. perry.
the expense shall not be thought ofand though he is so liberal and so fond of jane that i dare sayhe would not mean to charge any thing for attendance we could notsuffer it to be so you know.
he has a wife and family to maintainand is not to be giving away his time.
well now i have just given youa hint of what jane writes about we will turn to her letter and i amsure she tells her own story a great deal better than i can tell itfor her.i am afraid we must be running away said emma glancing at harrietand beginning to risemy father will be expecting us.i had no intention i thought i had no power of staying more thanfive minutes when i first entered the house.
i merely calledbecause i would not pass the door without inquiring after mrs. batesbut i have been so pleasantly detained  now however we must wishyou and mrs. bates good morning.and not all that could be urged to detain her succeeded.she regained the streethappy in this that though much had beenforced on her against her will though she had in fact heardthe whole substance of jane fairfaxs letter she had been ableto escape the letter itself.chapter iijane fairfax was an orphan the only child of mrs. batessyoungest daughter.the marriage of lieut.
fairfax of the  regiment of infantryand miss jane bates had had its day of fame and pleasurehope and interest but nothing now remained of it save the melancholyremembrance of him dying in action abroadof his widow sinkingunder consumption and grief soon afterwardsand this girl.by birth she belonged to highbury  and when at three years oldon losing her mother she became the property the chargethe consolation the fondling of her grandmother and aunt there hadseemed every probability of her being permanently fixed thereof her being taught only what very limited means could commandand growing up with no advantages of connexion or improvementto be engrafted on what nature had given her in a pleasing persongood understanding and warmhearted wellmeaning relations.but the compassionate feelings of a friend of her father gavea change to her destiny.
this was colonel campbell who hadvery highly regarded fairfax as an excellent officer and mostdeserving young man and farther had been indebted to him forsuch attentions during a severe campfever as he believed had savedhis life.
these were claims which he did not learn to overlookthough some years passed away from the death of poor fairfaxbefore his own return to england put any thing in his power.when he did return he sought out the child and took notice of her.he was a married man with only one living child a girlabout janes age  and jane became their guest paying them long visitsand growing a favourite with all and before she was nine years oldhis daughters great fondness for her and his own wish of beinga real friend united to produce an offer from colonel campbellof undertaking the whole charge of her education.
it was acceptedand from that period jane had belonged to colonel campbells familyand had lived with them entirely only visiting her grandmotherfrom time to time.the plan was that she should be brought up for educating othersthe very few hundred pounds which she inherited from her fathermaking independence impossible.
to provide for her otherwisewas out of colonel campbells power for though his income by payand appointments was handsome his fortune was moderate and mustbe all his daughters but by giving her an education he hopedto be supplying the means of respectable subsistence hereafter.such was jane fairfaxs history.
she had fallen into good handsknown nothing but kindness from the campbells and been givenan excellent education.
living constantly with rightmindedand wellinformed people her heart and understanding had receivedevery advantage of discipline and culture and colonel campbellsresidence being in london every lighter talent had been donefull justice to by the attendance of firstrate masters.her disposition and abilities were equally worthy of all thatfriendship could do and at eighteen or nineteen she was as faras such an early age can be qualified for the care of childrenfully competent to the office of instruction herself but shewas too much beloved to be parted with.
neither father nor mothercould promote and the daughter could not endure it.
the evil daywas put off.
it was easy to decide that she was still too youngand jane remained with them sharing as another daughter in allthe rational pleasures of an elegant society and a judiciousmixture of home and amusement with only the drawback of the futurethe sobering suggestions of her own good understanding to remindher that all this might soon be over.the affection of the whole family the warm attachment of misscampbell in particular was the more honourable to each partyfrom the circumstance of janes decided superiority both in beautyand acquirements.
that nature had given it in feature could notbe unseen by the young woman nor could her higher powers of mindbe unfelt by the parents.
they continued together with unabatedregard however till the marriage of miss campbell who by that chancethat luck which so often defies anticipation in matrimonial affairsgiving attraction to what is moderate rather than to what is superiorengaged the affections of mr. dixon a young man rich and agreeablealmost as soon as they were acquainted and was eligiblyand happily settled while jane fairfax had yet her bread to earn.this event had very lately taken place too lately for any thing to beyet attempted by her less fortunate friend towards entering on her pathof duty though she had now reached the age which her own judgmenthad fixed on for beginning.
she had long resolved that oneandtwentyshould be the period.
with the fortitude of a devoted novitiateshe had resolved at oneandtwenty to complete the sacrificeand retire from all the pleasures of life of rational intercourseequal society peace and hope to penance and mortification for ever.the good sense of colonel and mrs. campbell could not oppose sucha resolution though their feelings did.
as long as they livedno exertions would be necessary their home might be hers for everand for their own comfort they would have retained her whollybut this would be selfishnesswhat must be at last had betterbe soon.
perhaps they began to feel it might have been kinderand wiser to have resisted the temptation of any delay and sparedher from a taste of such enjoyments of ease and leisure as mustnow be relinquished.
still however affection was glad to catchat any reasonable excuse for not hurrying on the wretched moment.she had never been quite well since the time of their daughters marriageand till she should have completely recovered her usual strengththey must forbid her engaging in duties which so far from beingcompatible with a weakened frame and varying spirits seemedunder the most favourable circumstances to require somethingmore than human perfection of body and mind to be discharged withtolerable comfort.with regard to her not accompanying them to ireland her accountto her aunt contained nothing but truth though there might be sometruths not told.
it was her own choice to give the time of theirabsence to highbury to spend perhaps her last months of perfectliberty with those kind relations to whom she was so very dearand the campbells whatever might be their motive or motiveswhether single or double or treble gave the arrangementtheir ready sanction and said that they depended more on a fewmonths spent in her native air for the recovery of her healththan on any thing else.
certain it was that she was to comeand that highbury instead of welcoming that perfect novelty whichhad been so long promised itmr.
frank churchillmust put up forthe present with jane fairfax who could bring only the freshnessof a two years absence.emma was sorryto have to pay civilities to a person she didnot like through three long monthsto be always doing more thanshe wished and less than she ought  why she did not like janefairfax might be a difficult question to answer mr. knightleyhad once told her it was because she saw in her the reallyaccomplished young woman which she wanted to be thought herselfand though the accusation had been eagerly refuted at the timethere were moments of selfexamination in which her conscience couldnot quite acquit her.
but she could never get acquainted with hershe did not know how it was but there was such coldness and reservesuch apparent indifference whether she pleased or notand thenher aunt was such an eternal talkerand she was made such a fusswith by every bodyand it had been always imagined that they wereto be so intimatebecause their ages were the same every body hadsupposed they must be so fond of each other.
these were her reasonsshe had no better.it was a dislike so little justevery imputed fault was so magnifiedby fancy that she never saw jane fairfax the first time after anyconsiderable absence without feeling that she had injured herand now when the due visit was paid on her arrival after a two yearsinterval she was particularly struck with the very appearanceand manners which for those two whole years she had been depreciating.jane fairfax was very elegant remarkably elegant and she hadherself the highest value for elegance.
her height was prettyjust such as almost every body would think tall and nobody couldthink very tall her figure particularly graceful her size a mostbecoming medium between fat and thin though a slight appearanceof illhealth seemed to point out the likeliest evil of the two.emma could not but feel all this and then her faceher featuresthere was more beauty in them altogether than she had rememberedit was not regular but it was very pleasing beauty.
her eyesa deep grey with dark eyelashes and eyebrows had never been deniedtheir praise but the skin which she had been used to cavil atas wanting colour had a clearness and delicacy which really neededno fuller bloom.
it was a style of beauty of which elegancewas the reigning character and as such she must in honourby all her principles admire itelegance which whether of personor of mind she saw so little in highbury.
there not to be vulgarwas distinction and merit.in short she sat during the first visit looking at jane fairfaxwith twofold complacency the sense of pleasure and the senseof rendering justice and was determining that she would dislikeher no longer.
when she took in her history indeed her situationas well as her beauty when she considered what all this elegancewas destined to what she was going to sink from how she was goingto live it seemed impossible to feel any thing but compassionand respect especially if to every wellknown particular entitlingher to interest were added the highly probable circumstanceof an attachment to mr. dixon which she had so naturally startedto herself.
in that case nothing could be more pitiableor more honourable than the sacrifices she had resolved on.emma was very willing now to acquit her of having seducedmr.
dixons actions from his wife or of any thing mischievouswhich her imagination had suggested at first.
if it were loveit might be simple single successless love on her side alone.she might have been unconsciously sucking in the sad poisonwhile a sharer of his conversation with her friend and from the bestthe purest of motives might now be denying herself this visitto ireland and resolving to divide herself effectually fromhim and his connexions by soon beginning her career of laborious duty.upon the whole emma left her with such softened charitable feelingsas made her look around in walking home and lament that highburyafforded no young man worthy of giving her independencenobody that she could wish to scheme about for her.these were charming feelingsbut not lasting.
before she hadcommitted herself by any public profession of eternal friendship forjane fairfax or done more towards a recantation of past prejudicesand errors than saying to mr. knightley she certainly is handsomeshe is better than handsome  jane had spent an evening at hartfieldwith her grandmother and aunt and every thing was relapsing muchinto its usual state.
former provocations reappeared.
the auntwas as tiresome as ever more tiresome because anxiety for herhealth was now added to admiration of her powers and they had tolisten to the description of exactly how little bread and buttershe ate for breakfast and how small a slice of mutton for dinneras well as to see exhibitions of new caps and new workbags for hermother and herself and janes offences rose again.
they had musicemma was obliged to play and the thanks and praise which necessarilyfollowed appeared to her an affectation of candour an airof greatness meaning only to shew off in higher style her own verysuperior performance.
she was besides which was the worst of allso cold so cautious  there was no getting at her real opinion.wrapt up in a cloak of politeness she seemed determinedto hazard nothing.
she was disgustingly was suspiciously reserved.if any thing could be more where all was most she was morereserved on the subject of weymouth and the dixons than any thing.she seemed bent on giving no real insight into mr. dixons characteror her own value for his company or opinion of the suitablenessof the match.
it was all general approbation and smoothnessnothing delineated or distinguished.
it did her no service however.her caution was thrown away.
emma saw its artifice and returnedto her first surmises.
there probably was something more to concealthan her own preference mr. dixon perhaps had been very nearchanging one friend for the other or been fixed only to miss campbellfor the sake of the future twelve thousand pounds.the like reserve prevailed on other topics.
she and mr. frank churchillhad been at weymouth at the same time.
it was known that they werea little acquainted but not a syllable of real information could emmaprocure as to what he truly was.
was he handsomeshe believedhe was reckoned a very fine young man.
was he agreeablehe was generally thought so.
did he appear a sensible young mana young man of informationat a wateringplace or in a commonlondon acquaintance it was difficult to decide on such points.manners were all that could be safely judged of under a much longerknowledge than they had yet had of mr. churchill.
she believedevery body found his manners pleasing.
emma could not forgive her.chapter iiiemma could not forgive herbut as neither provocation nor resentmentwere discerned by mr. knightley who had been of the party and hadseen only proper attention and pleasing behaviour on each sidehe was expressing the next morning being at hartfield again onbusiness with mr. woodhouse his approbation of the whole not soopenly as he might have done had her father been out of the roombut speaking plain enough to be very intelligible to emma.he had been used to think her unjust to jane and had now greatpleasure in marking an improvement.a very pleasant evening he began as soon as mr. woodhousehad been talked into what was necessary told that he understoodand the papers swept awayparticularly pleasant.
you and missfairfax gave us some very good music.
i do not know a moreluxurious state sir than sitting at ones ease to be entertaineda whole evening by two such young women sometimes with musicand sometimes with conversation.
i am sure miss fairfax musthave found the evening pleasant emma.
you left nothing undone.i was glad you made her play so much for having no instrumentat her grandmothers it must have been a real indulgence.i am happy you approved said emma smiling but i hope i amnot often deficient in what is due to guests at hartfield.no my dear said her father instantly that i am sure youare not.
there is nobody half so attentive and civil as you are.if any thing you are too attentive.
the muffin last nightif ithad been handed round once i think it would have been enough.no said mr. knightley nearly at the same time you are notoften deficient not often deficient either in manner or comprehension.i think you understand me therefore.an arch look expressedi understand you well enough but shesaid only miss fairfax is reserved.i always told you she wasa little but you will soon overcomeall that part of her reserve which ought to be overcome all thathas its foundation in diffidence.
what arises from discretionmust be honoured.you think her diffident.
i do not see it.my dear emma said he moving from his chair into one closeby her you are not going to tell me i hope that youhad not a pleasant evening.oh no i was pleased with my own perseverance in asking questionsand amused to think how little information i obtained.i am disappointed was his only answer.i hope every body had a pleasant evening said mr. woodhousein his quiet way.
i had.
once i felt the fire rather too muchbut then i moved back my chair a little a very little and it didnot disturb me.
miss bates was very chatty and goodhumouredas she always is though she speaks rather too quick.
howevershe is very agreeable and mrs. bates too in a different way.i like old friends and miss jane fairfax is a very pretty sort ofyoung lady a very pretty and a very wellbehaved young lady indeed.she must have found the evening agreeable mr. knightley because shehad emma.true sir and emma because she had miss fairfax.emma saw his anxiety and wishing to appease it at least forthe present said and with a sincerity which no one could questionshe is a sort of elegant creature that one cannot keep ones eyes from.i am always watching her to admire and i do pity her from my heart.mr.
knightley looked as if he were more gratified than he caredto express and before he could make any reply mr. woodhousewhose thoughts were on the batess saidit is a great pity that their circumstances should be so confineda great pity indeed and i have often wishedbut it is so little onecan venture to dosmall trifling presents of any thing uncommonnow we have killed a porker and emma thinks of sending thema loin or a leg it is very small and delicatehartfield pork isnot like any other porkbut still it is porkand my dear emmaunless one could be sure of their making it into steaks nicely friedas ours are fried without the smallest grease and not roast itfor no stomach can bear roast porki think we had better send the legdo not you think so my dearmy dear papa i sent the whole hindquarter.
i knew you would wish it.there will be the leg to be salted you know which is so very niceand the loin to be dressed directly in any manner they like.thats right my dear very right.
i had not thought of it beforebut that is the best way.
they must not oversalt the leg and thenif it is not oversalted and if it is very thoroughly boiledjust as serle boils ours and eaten very moderately of with aboiled turnip and a little carrot or parsnip i do not considerit unwholesome.emma said mr. knightley presently i have a piece of news for you.you like newsand i heard an article in my way hither that i thinkwill interest you.news  oh yes i always like news.
what is itwhy do yousmile sowhere did you hear itat randallshe had time only to sayno not at randalls i have not been near randalls when the doorwas thrown open and miss bates and miss fairfax walked into the room.full of thanks and full of news miss bates knew not which togive quickest.
mr. knightley soon saw that he had lost his momentand that not another syllable of communication could rest with him.oh my dear sir how are you this morning  my dear miss woodhousei come quite overpowered.
such a beautiful hindquarter of porkyou are too bountiful  have you heard the news  mr. elton is goingto be married.emma had not had time even to think of mr. elton and she wasso completely surprized that she could not avoid a little startand a little blush at the sound.there is my newsi thought it would interest yousaid mr. knightley with a smile which implied a convictionof some part of what had passed between them.but where could you hear it cried miss bates.
where couldyou possibly hear it mr. knightley  for it is not five minutessince i received mrs. coles noteno it cannot be more than fiveor at least tenfor i had got my bonnet and spencer on just readyto come outi was only gone down to speak to patty again aboutthe porkjane was standing in the passagewere not you janefor my mother was so afraid that we had not any saltingpanlarge enough.
so i said i would go down and see and jane saidshall i go down instead for i think you have a little coldand patty has been washing the kitchen.oh my dearsaid iwell and just then came the note.
a miss hawkinsthats all i know.
a miss hawkins of bath.
but mr. knightleyhow could you possibly have heard it for the very moment mr. coletold mrs. cole of it she sat down and wrote to me.
a miss hawkinsi was with mr. cole on business an hour and a half ago.he had just read eltons letter as i was shewn in and handed itto me directly.well that is quitei suppose there never was a piece of news moregenerally interesting.
my dear sir you really are too bountiful.my mother desires her very best compliments and regards and athousand thanks and says you really quite oppress her.we consider our hartfield pork replied mr. woodhouseindeed itcertainly is so very superior to all other pork that emma and icannot have a greater pleasure thanoh my dear sir as my mother says our friends are only too goodto us.
if ever there were people who without having great wealththemselves had every thing they could wish for i am sure it is us.we may well say that our lot is cast in a goodly heritage.well mr. knightley and so you actually saw the letter wellit was shortmerely to announcebut cheerful exulting of course.here was a sly glance at emma.
he had been so fortunate as toi forget the precise wordsone has no business to remember them.the information was as you state that he was going to be marriedto a miss hawkins.
by his style i should imagine it just settled.mr.
elton going to be married said emma as soon as she could speak.he will have every bodys wishes for his happiness.he is very young to settle was mr. woodhouses observation.he had better not be in a hurry.
he seemed to me very well offas he was.
we were always glad to see him at hartfield.a new neighbour for us all miss woodhouse said miss batesjoyfully my mother is so pleasedshe says she cannotbear to have the poor old vicarage without a mistress.this is great news indeed.
jane you have never seenmr.
eltonno wonder that you have such a curiosity to see him.janes curiosity did not appear of that absorbing nature as whollyto occupy her.noi have never seen mr. elton she replied starting on this appealis heis he a tall manwho shall answer that question cried emma.
my father wouldsay yes mr. knightley no and miss bates and i that he isjust the happy medium.
when you have been here a little longermiss fairfax you will understand that mr. elton is the standardof perfection in highbury both in person and mind.very true miss woodhouse so she will.
he is the very bestyoung manbut my dear jane if you remember i told you yesterdayhe was precisely the height of mr. perry.
miss hawkinsi dare sayan excellent young woman.
his extreme attention to my motherwanting her to sit in the vicarage pew that she might hear the betterfor my mother is a little deaf you knowit is not much but shedoes not hear quite quick.
jane says that colonel campbell is alittle deaf.
he fancied bathing might be good for itthe warm bathbut she says it did him no lasting benefit.
colonel campbellyou know is quite our angel.
and mr. dixon seems a very charmingyoung man quite worthy of him.
it is such a happiness when goodpeople get togetherand they always do.
now here will be mr. eltonand miss hawkins and there are the coles such very good peopleand the perrysi suppose there never was a happier or a better couplethan mr. and mrs. perry.
i say sir turning to mr. woodhousei think there are few places with such society as highbury.i always say we are quite blessed in our neighbours.my dear sirif there is one thing my mother loves better than another it is porka roast loin of porkas to who or what miss hawkins is or how long he has beenacquainted with her said emma nothing i suppose can be known.one feels that it cannot be a very long acquaintance.
he has beengone only four weeks.nobody had any information to give and after a few more wonderingsemma saidyou are silent miss fairfaxbut i hope you mean to takean interest in this news.
you who have been hearing and seeingso much of late on these subjects who must have been so deepin the business on miss campbells accountwe shall not excuseyour being indifferent about mr. elton and miss hawkins.when i have seen mr. elton replied jane i dare say ishall be interestedbut i believe it requires that with me.and as it is some months since miss campbell married the impressionmay be a little worn off.yes he has been gone just four weeks as you observe miss woodhousesaid miss bates four weeks yesterday.a miss hawkinswell i hadalways rather fancied it would be some young lady hereaboutsnot that i evermrs.
cole once whispered to mebut i immediately saidno mr. elton is a most worthy young manbutin short i donot think i am particularly quick at those sort of discoveries.i do not pretend to it.
what is before me i see.
at the same timenobody could wonder if mr. elton should have aspiredmiss woodhouselets me chatter on so goodhumouredly.
she knows i would notoffend for the world.
how does miss smith do  she seems quiterecovered now.
have you heard from mrs. john knightley latelyoh those dear little children.
jane do you know i always fancymr.
dixon like mr. john knightley.
i mean in persontall and withthat sort of lookand not very talkative.quite wrong my dear aunt there is no likeness at all.very odd but one never does form a just idea of any body beforehand.one takes up a notion and runs away with it.
mr. dixon you sayis not strictly speaking handsomehandsome  oh nofar from itcertainly plain.
i told you hewas plain.my dear you said that miss campbell would not allow him to be plainand that you yourselfoh as for me my judgment is worth nothing.
where i have a regardi always think a person welllooking.
but i gave what i believedthe general opinion when i called him plain.well my dear jane i believe we must be running away.the weather does not look well and grandmama will be uneasy.you are too obliging my dear miss woodhouse but we really musttake leave.
this has been a most agreeable piece of news indeed.i shall just go round by mrs. coles but i shall not stop three minutesand jane you had better go home directlyi would not have youout in a showerwe think she is the better for highbury already.thank you we do indeed.
i shall not attempt calling on mrs. goddardfor i really do not think she cares for any thing but boiled porkwhen we dress the leg it will be another thing.
good morning to youmy dear sir.
oh  mr. knightley is coming too.
well that isso veryi am sure if jane is tired you will be so kind as togive her your arm.mr.
elton and miss hawkinsgood morningto you.emma alone with her father had half her attention wanted by himwhile he lamented that young people would be in such a hurry to marryand to marry strangers tooand the other half she could giveto her own view of the subject.
it was to herself an amusingand a very welcome piece of news as proving that mr. eltoncould not have suffered long but she was sorry for harrietharriet must feel itand all that she could hope was by givingthe first information herself to save her from hearing it abruptlyfrom others.
it was now about the time that she was likely to call.if she were to meet miss bates in her wayand upon its beginningto rain emma was obliged to expect that the weather would bedetaining her at mrs. goddards and that the intelligence wouldundoubtedly rush upon her without preparation.the shower was heavy but short and it had not been over five minuteswhen in came harriet with just the heated agitated look whichhurrying thither with a full heart was likely to give and theoh miss woodhouse what do you think has happened which instantlyburst forth had all the evidence of corresponding perturbation.as the blow was given emma felt that she could not now shew greaterkindness than in listening and harriet unchecked ran eagerlythrough what she had to tell.
she had set out from mrs. goddardshalf an hour agoshe had been afraid it would rainshe had beenafraid it would pour down every momentbut she thought she mightget to hartfield firstshe had hurried on as fast as possiblebut then as she was passing by the house where a young womanwas making up a gown for her she thought she would just stepin and see how it went on and though she did not seem to stayhalf a moment there soon after she came out it began to rainand she did not know what to do so she ran on directly as fastas she could and took shelter at fords.fords was the principalwoollendraper linendraper and haberdashers shop unitedthe shop first in size and fashion in the place.and sothere she had set without an idea of any thing in the worldfull ten minutes perhapswhen all of a sudden who should come into be sure it was so very oddbut they always dealt at fordswho should come in but elizabeth martin and her brotherdear miss woodhouse only think.
i thought i should have fainted.i did not know what to do.
i was sitting near the doorelizabeth sawme directly but he did not he was busy with the umbrella.i am sure she saw me but she looked away directly and tookno notice and they both went to quite the farther end of the shopand i kept sitting near the dooroh dear i was so miserablei am sure i must have been as white as my gown.
i could not go awayyou know because of the rain but i did so wish myself anywherein the world but there.oh dear miss woodhousewell at lasti fancy he looked round and saw me for instead of goingon with her buyings they began whispering to one another.i am sure they were talking of me and i could not help thinkingthat he was persuading her to speak to medo you think he wasmiss woodhousefor presently she came forwardcame quite upto me and asked me how i did and seemed ready to shake handsif i would.
she did not do any of it in the same way that she usedi could see she was altered but however she seemed to try to bevery friendly and we shook hands and stood talking some timebut i know no more what i saidi was in such a tremblei remembershe said she was sorry we never met now which i thought almosttoo kind  dear miss woodhouse i was absolutely miserableby that time it was beginning to hold up and i was determinedthat nothing should stop me from getting awayand thenonly thinki found he was coming up towards me tooslowly you know and asif he did not quite know what to do and so he came and spokeand i answeredand i stood for a minute feeling dreadfullyyou know one cant tell how and then i took courage and said itdid not rain and i must go and so off i set and i had not gotthree yards from the door when he came after me only to sayif i was going to hartfield he thought i had much better go roundby mr. coles stables for i should find the near way quite floatedby this rain.
oh dear i thought it would have been the death of meso i said i was very much obliged to him  you know i couldnot do less and then he went back to elizabeth and i came roundby the stablesi believe i didbut i hardly knew where i wasor any thing about it.
oh  miss woodhouse i would rather doneany thing than have it happen  and yet you know there was a sortof satisfaction in seeing him behave so pleasantly and so kindly.and elizabeth too.
oh  miss woodhouse do talk to me and makeme comfortable again.very sincerely did emma wish to do so but it was not immediately inher power.
she was obliged to stop and think.
she was not thoroughlycomfortable herself.
the young mans conduct and his sistersseemed the result of real feeling and she could not but pity them.as harriet described it there had been an interesting mixtureof wounded affection and genuine delicacy in their behaviour.but she had believed them to be wellmeaning worthy people beforeand what difference did this make in the evils of the connexionit was folly to be disturbed by it.
of course he must be sorryto lose herthey must be all sorry.
ambition as well as lovehad probably been mortified.
they might all have hoped to riseby harriets acquaintance  and besides what was the value ofharriets descriptionso easily pleasedso little discerningwhat signified her praiseshe exerted herself and did try to make her comfortableby considering all that had passed as a mere trifle and quiteunworthy of being dwelt onit might be distressing for the moment said she but you seemto have behaved extremely well and it is overand may nevercan never as a first meeting occur again and therefore you neednot think about it.harriet said very true and she would not think about itbut still she talked of itstill she could talk of nothing elseand emma at last in order to put the martins out of her headwas obliged to hurry on the news which she had meant to givewith so much tender caution hardly knowing herself whetherto rejoice or be angry ashamed or only amused at such a stateof mind in poor harrietsuch a conclusion of mr. eltons importancewith hermr.
eltons rights however gradually revived.
though she did notfeel the first intelligence as she might have done the day beforeor an hour before its interest soon increased and before theirfirst conversation was over she had talked herself into all thesensations of curiosity wonder and regret pain and pleasureas to this fortunate miss hawkins which could conduce to placethe martins under proper subordination in her fancy.emma learned to be rather glad that there had been such a meeting.it had been serviceable in deadening the first shock without retainingany influence to alarm.
as harriet now lived the martins couldnot get at her without seeking her where hitherto they had wantedeither the courage or the condescension to seek her for since herrefusal of the brother the sisters never had been at mrs. goddardsand a twelvemonth might pass without their being thrown together againwith any necessity or even any power of speech.chapter ivhuman nature is so well disposed towards those who are ininteresting situations that a young person who either marriesor dies is sure of being kindly spoken of.a week had not passed since miss hawkinss name was firstmentioned in highbury before she was by some means or otherdiscovered to have every recommendation of person and mindto be handsome elegant highly accomplished and perfectly amiableand when mr. elton himself arrived to triumph in his happy prospectsand circulate the fame of her merits there was very little morefor him to do than to tell her christian name and say whosemusic she principally played.mr.
elton returned a very happy man.
he had gone away rejectedand mortifieddisappointed in a very sanguine hope after a seriesof what appeared to him strong encouragement and not only losingthe right lady but finding himself debased to the level of a verywrong one.
he had gone away deeply offendedhe came back engagedto anotherand to another as superior of course to the firstas under such circumstances what is gained always is to what is lost.he came back gay and selfsatisfied eager and busy caring nothingfor miss woodhouse and defying miss smith.the charming augusta hawkins in addition to all the usual advantagesof perfect beauty and merit was in possession of an independent fortuneof so many thousands as would always be called ten a point ofsome dignity as well as some convenience  the story told wellhe had not thrown himself awayhe had gained a woman of  l.or thereabouts and he had gained her with such delightful rapiditythe first hour of introduction had been so very soon followed bydistinguishing notice the history which he had to give mrs. coleof the rise and progress of the affair was so gloriousthe stepsso quick from the accidental rencontre to the dinner at mr. greensand the party at mrs. brownssmiles and blushes rising in importancewith consciousness and agitation richly scatteredthe ladyhad been so easily impressedso sweetly disposedhad in shortto use a most intelligible phrase been so very ready to have himthat vanity and prudence were equally contented.he had caught both substance and shadowboth fortune and affectionand was just the happy man he ought to be talking only of himselfand his own concernsexpecting to be congratulatedready to belaughed atand with cordial fearless smiles now addressingall the young ladies of the place to whom a few weeks agohe would have been more cautiously gallant.the wedding was no distant event as the parties had only themselvesto please and nothing but the necessary preparations to wait forand when he set out for bath again there was a general expectationwhich a certain glance of mrs. coles did not seem to contradictthat when he next entered highbury he would bring his bride.during his present short stay emma had barely seen him but justenough to feel that the first meeting was over and to give herthe impression of his not being improved by the mixture of piqueand pretension now spread over his air.
she was in factbeginning very much to wonder that she had ever thought him pleasingat all and his sight was so inseparably connected with some verydisagreeable feelings that except in a moral light as a penancea lesson a source of profitable humiliation to her own mindshe would have been thankful to be assured of never seeing him again.she wished him very well but he gave her pain and his welfaretwenty miles off would administer most satisfaction.the pain of his continued residence in highbury however must certainlybe lessened by his marriage.
many vain solicitudes would be preventedmany awkwardnesses smoothed by it.
a mrs. elton would be an excuse forany change of intercourse former intimacy might sink without remark.it would be almost beginning their life of civility again.of the lady individually emma thought very little.
she was goodenough for mr. elton no doubt accomplished enough for highburyhandsome enoughto look plain probably by harriets side.as to connexion there emma was perfectly easy persuadedthat after all his own vaunted claims and disdain of harriethe had done nothing.
on that article truth seemed attainable.what she was must be uncertain but who she was might be found outand setting aside the  l. it did not appear that she was atall harriets superior.
she brought no name no blood no alliance.miss hawkins was the youngest of the two daughters of a bristolmerchant of course he must be called but as the whole of theprofits of his mercantile life appeared so very moderate it wasnot unfair to guess the dignity of his line of trade had been verymoderate also.
part of every winter she had been used to spend in bathbut bristol was her home the very heart of bristol for thoughthe father and mother had died some years ago an uncle remainedin the law linenothing more distinctly honourable was hazardedof him than that he was in the law line and with him the daughterhad lived.
emma guessed him to be the drudge of some attorneyand too stupid to rise.
and all the grandeur of the connexionseemed dependent on the elder sister who was very well marriedto a gentleman in a great way near bristol who kept two carriagesthat was the windup of the history that was the glory ofmiss hawkins.could she but have given harriet her feelings about it allshe had talked her into love but alas she was not so easily to betalked out of it.
the charm of an object to occupy the many vacanciesof harriets mind was not to be talked away.
he might be supersededby another he certainly would indeed nothing could be clearereven a robert martin would have been sufficient but nothing elseshe feared would cure her.
harriet was one of those whohaving once begun would be always in love.
and now poor girlshe was considerably worse from this reappearance of mr. elton.she was always having a glimpse of him somewhere or other.
emma sawhim only once but two or three times every day harriet was surejust to meet with him or just to miss him just to hear his voiceor see his shoulder just to have something occur to preserve himin her fancy in all the favouring warmth of surprize and conjecture.she was moreover perpetually hearing about him for excepting whenat hartfield she was always among those who saw no fault in mr. eltonand found nothing so interesting as the discussion of his concernsand every report therefore every guessall that had alreadyoccurred all that might occur in the arrangement of his affairscomprehending income servants and furniture was continuallyin agitation around her.
her regard was receiving strength byinvariable praise of him and her regrets kept alive and feelingsirritated by ceaseless repetitions of miss hawkinss happinessand continual observation of how much he seemed attachedhis air as he walked by the housethe very sitting of his hatbeing all in proof of how much he was in lovehad it been allowable entertainment had there been no painto her friend or reproach to herself in the waverings ofharriets mind emma would have been amused by its variations.sometimes mr. elton predominated sometimes the martins and eachwas occasionally useful as a check to the other.
mr. eltonsengagement had been the cure of the agitation of meeting mr. martin.the unhappiness produced by the knowledge of that engagement had beena little put aside by elizabeth martins calling at mrs. goddardsa few days afterwards.
harriet had not been at home but a note hadbeen prepared and left for her written in the very style to toucha small mixture of reproach with a great deal of kindnessand till mr. elton himself appeared she had been much occupiedby it continually pondering over what could be done in returnand wishing to do more than she dared to confess.
but mr. eltonin person had driven away all such cares.
while he staidthe martins were forgotten and on the very morning of his setting offfor bath again emma to dissipate some of the distress it occasionedjudged it best for her to return elizabeth martins visit.how that visit was to be acknowledgedwhat would be necessaryand what might be safest had been a point of some doubtfulconsideration.
absolute neglect of the mother and sisterswhen invited to come would be ingratitude.
it must not beand yet the danger of a renewal of the acquaintanceafter much thinking she could determine on nothing better than harrietsreturning the visit but in a way that if they had understandingshould convince them that it was to be only a formal acquaintance.she meant to take her in the carriage leave her at the abbey millwhile she drove a little farther and call for her again so soonas to allow no time for insidious applications or dangerousrecurrences to the past and give the most decided proof of whatdegree of intimacy was chosen for the future.she could think of nothing better  and though there was somethingin it which her own heart could not approvesomething of ingratitudemerely glossed overit must be done or what would become of harrietchapter vsmall heart had harriet for visiting.
only half an hour before herfriend called for her at mrs. goddards her evil stars had ledher to the very spot where at that moment a trunk directed tothe rev.
philip elton whitehart bath was to be seen under theoperation of being lifted into the butchers cart which was toconvey it to where the coaches past and every thing in this worldexcepting that trunk and the direction was consequently a blank.she went however and when they reached the farm and she was tobe put down at the end of the broad neat gravel walk which ledbetween espalier appletrees to the front door the sight of everything which had given her so much pleasure the autumn beforewas beginning to revive a little local agitation and when they partedemma observed her to be looking around with a sort of fearful curiositywhich determined her not to allow the visit to exceed the proposedquarter of an hour.
she went on herself to give that portionof time to an old servant who was married and settled in donwell.the quarter of an hour brought her punctually to the white gate againand miss smith receiving her summons was with her without delayand unattended by any alarming young man.
she came solitarilydown the gravel walka miss martin just appearing at the doorand parting with her seemingly with ceremonious civility.harriet could not very soon give an intelligible account.she was feeling too much but at last emma collected from herenough to understand the sort of meeting and the sort of pain itwas creating.
she had seen only mrs. martin and the two girls.they had received her doubtingly if not coolly and nothingbeyond the merest commonplace had been talked almost all the timetill just at last when mrs. martins saying all of a suddenthat she thought miss smith was grown had brought on a moreinteresting subject and a warmer manner.
in that very roomshe had been measured last september with her two friends.there were the pencilled marks and memorandums on the wainscot bythe window.
he had done it.
they all seemed to remember the daythe hour the party the occasionto feel the same consciousnessthe same regretsto be ready to return to the same good understandingand they were just growing again like themselves harriet as emmamust suspect as ready as the best of them to be cordial and happywhen the carriage reappeared and all was over.
the style ofthe visit and the shortness of it were then felt to be decisive.fourteen minutes to be given to those with whom she had thankfullypassed six weeks not six months agoemma could not but pictureit all and feel how justly they might resent how naturallyharriet must suffer.
it was a bad business.
she would have givena great deal or endured a great deal to have had the martinsin a higher rank of life.
they were so deserving that a littlehigher should have been enough  but as it was how could she havedone otherwiseimpossibleshe could not repent.
they mustbe separated but there was a great deal of pain in the processso much to herself at this time that she soon felt the necessityof a little consolation and resolved on going home by way of randallsto procure it.
her mind was quite sick of mr. elton and the martins.the refreshment of randalls was absolutely necessary.it was a good scheme but on driving to the door they heardthat neither master nor mistress was at home they had bothbeen out some time the man believed they were gone to hartfield.this is too bad cried emma as they turned away.
and now weshall just miss them too provokingi do not know when i have beenso disappointed.
and she leaned back in the corner to indulgeher murmurs or to reason them away probably a little of bothsuch being the commonest process of a not illdisposed mind.presently the carriage stopt she looked up it was stoptby mr. and mrs. weston who were standing to speak to her.there was instant pleasure in the sight of them and still greaterpleasure was conveyed in soundfor mr. weston immediately accostedher withhow dye dohow dye dowe have been sitting with your fatherglad to see him so well.
frank comes tomorrowi had a letterthis morningwe see him tomorrow by dinnertime to a certaintyhe is at oxford today and he comes for a whole fortnight i knew it wouldbe so.
if he had come at christmas he could not have staid three daysi was always glad he did not come at christmas now we are goingto have just the right weather for him fine dry settled weather.we shall enjoy him completely every thing has turned out exactlyas we could wish.there was no resisting such news no possibility of avoiding theinfluence of such a happy face as mr. westons confirmed as it allwas by the words and the countenance of his wife fewer and quieterbut not less to the purpose.
to know that she thought his comingcertain was enough to make emma consider it so and sincerely didshe rejoice in their joy.
it was a most delightful reanimationof exhausted spirits.
the wornout past was sunk in the freshnessof what was coming and in the rapidity of half a moments thoughtshe hoped mr. elton would now be talked of no more.mr.
weston gave her the history of the engagements at enscombewhich allowed his son to answer for having an entire fortnight athis command as well as the route and the method of his journeyand she listened and smiled and congratulated.i shall soon bring him over to hartfield said he at the conclusion.emma could imagine she saw a touch of the arm at this speechfrom his wife.we had better move on mr. weston said she we are detainingthe girls.well well i am readyand turning again to emma but you mustnot be expecting such a very fine young man you have only had myaccount you know i dare say he is really nothing extraordinarythough his own sparkling eyes at the moment were speaking a verydifferent conviction.emma could look perfectly unconscious and innocent and answerin a manner that appropriated nothing.think of me tomorrow my dear emma about four oclockwas mrs. westons parting injunction spoken with some anxietyand meant only for her.four oclockdepend upon it he will be here by three was mr. westonsquick amendment and so ended a most satisfactory meeting.emmas spirits were mounted quite up to happiness every thing worea different air james and his horses seemed not half so sluggishas before.
when she looked at the hedges she thought the elder atleast must soon be coming out and when she turned round to harrietshe saw something like a look of spring a tender smile even there.will mr. frank churchill pass through bath as well as oxfordwas a question however which did not augur much.but neither geography nor tranquillity could come all at onceand emma was now in a humour to resolve that they should both comein time.the morning of the interesting day arrived and mrs. westonsfaithful pupil did not forget either at ten or eleven or twelveoclock that she was to think of her at four.my dear dear anxious friendsaid she in mental soliloquywhile walking downstairs from her own room always overcarefulfor every bodys comfort but your own i see you now in all yourlittle fidgets going again and again into his room to be surethat all is right.
the clock struck twelve as she passed throughthe hall.
tis twelve i shall not forget to think of you fourhours hence and by this time tomorrow perhaps or a little lateri may be thinking of the possibility of their all calling here.i am sure they will bring him soon.she opened the parlour door and saw two gentlemen sitting withher fathermr.
weston and his son.
they had been arrived onlya few minutes and mr. weston had scarcely finished his explanationof franks being a day before his time and her father was yetin the midst of his very civil welcome and congratulations whenshe appeared to have her share of surprize introduction and pleasure.the frank churchill so long talked of so high in interestwas actually before herhe was presented to her and she didnot think too much had been said in his praise he was a very goodlooking young man height air address all were unexceptionableand his countenance had a great deal of the spirit and livelinessof his fathers he looked quick and sensible.
she felt immediatelythat she should like him and there was a wellbred ease of mannerand a readiness to talk which convinced her that he came intendingto be acquainted with her and that acquainted they soon must be.he had reached randalls the evening before.
she was pleasedwith the eagerness to arrive which had made him alter his planand travel earlier later and quicker that he might gain halfa day.i told you yesterday cried mr. weston with exultation i toldyou all that he would be here before the time named.
i rememberedwhat i used to do myself.
one cannot creep upon a journeyone cannot help getting on faster than one has planned and thepleasure of coming in upon ones friends before the lookout beginsis worth a great deal more than any little exertion it needs.it is a great pleasure where one can indulge in it said the young manthough there are not many houses that i should presume on so farbut in coming home i felt i might do any thing.the word home made his father look on him with fresh complacency.emma was directly sure that he knew how to make himself agreeablethe conviction was strengthened by what followed.
he was very muchpleased with randalls thought it a most admirably arranged housewould hardly allow it even to be very small admired the situationthe walk to highbury highbury itself hartfield still moreand professed himself to have always felt the sort of interestin the country which none but ones own country gives and thegreatest curiosity to visit it.
that he should never have beenable to indulge so amiable a feeling before passed suspiciouslythrough emmas brain but still if it were a falsehood it was apleasant one and pleasantly handled.
his manner had no air of studyor exaggeration.
he did really look and speak as if in a state of nocommon enjoyment.their subjects in general were such as belong to an opening acquaintance.on his side were the inquirieswas she a horsewomanpleasant ridespleasant walkshad they a large neighbourhoodhighbury perhapsafforded society enoughthere were several very pretty housesin and about it.ballshad they ballswas it a musical societybut when satisfied on all these points and their acquaintanceproportionably advanced he contrived to find an opportunitywhile their two fathers were engaged with each other of introducinghis motherinlaw and speaking of her with so much handsome praiseso much warm admiration so much gratitude for the happiness shesecured to his father and her very kind reception of himselfas was an additional proof of his knowing how to pleaseand of his certainly thinking it worth while to try to please her.he did not advance a word of praise beyond what she knew to bethoroughly deserved by mrs. weston but undoubtedly he could knowvery little of the matter.
he understood what would be welcomehe could be sure of little else.
his fathers marriage he saidhad been the wisest measure every friend must rejoice in itand the family from whom he had received such a blessing mustbe ever considered as having conferred the highest obligationon him.he got as near as he could to thanking her for miss taylors meritswithout seeming quite to forget that in the common course of things itwas to be rather supposed that miss taylor had formed miss woodhousescharacter than miss woodhouse miss taylors.
and at last as if resolvedto qualify his opinion completely for travelling round to its object hewound it all up with astonishment at the youth and beauty of her person.elegant agreeable manners i was prepared for said hebut i confess that considering every thing i had not expectedmore than a very tolerably welllooking woman of a certain agei did not know that i was to find a pretty young woman in mrs. weston.you cannot see too much perfection in mrs. weston for my feelingssaid emma were you to guess her to be eighteen i should listenwith pleasure but she would be ready to quarrel with you for usingsuch words.
dont let her imagine that you have spoken of her asa pretty young woman.i hope i should know better he replied no depend upon itwith a gallant bow that in addressing mrs. weston i shouldunderstand whom i might praise without any danger of being thoughtextravagant in my terms.emma wondered whether the same suspicion of what might be expectedfrom their knowing each other which had taken strong possessionof her mind had ever crossed his and whether his compliments wereto be considered as marks of acquiescence or proofs of defiance.she must see more of him to understand his ways at present sheonly felt they were agreeable.she had no doubt of what mr. weston was often thinking about.his quick eye she detected again and again glancing towards themwith a happy expression and even when he might have determined notto look she was confident that he was often listening.her own fathers perfect exemption from any thought of the kindthe entire deficiency in him of all such sort of penetrationor suspicion was a most comfortable circumstance.
happily hewas not farther from approving matrimony than from foreseeing it.though always objecting to every marriage that was arrangedhe never suffered beforehand from the apprehension of anyit seemed as if he could not think so ill of any two personsunderstanding as to suppose they meant to marry till it wereproved against them.
she blessed the favouring blindness.he could now without the drawback of a single unpleasant surmisewithout a glance forward at any possible treachery in his guestgive way to all his natural kindhearted civility in solicitousinquiries after mr. frank churchills accommodation on his journeythrough the sad evils of sleeping two nights on the road and expressvery genuine unmixed anxiety to know that he had certainly escapedcatching coldwhich however he could not allow him to feel quiteassured of himself till after another night.a reasonable visit paid mr. weston began to move.he must be going.he had business at the crown about his hay and a great many errandsfor mrs. weston at fords but he need not hurry any body else.his son too well bred to hear the hint rose immediately alsosayingas you are going farther on business sir i will take theopportunity of paying a visit which must be paid some day or otherand therefore may as well be paid now.
i have the honour of beingacquainted with a neighbour of yours turning to emma a ladyresiding in or near highbury a family of the name of fairfax.i shall have no difficulty i suppose in finding the housethough fairfax i believe is not the proper namei should rathersay barnes or bates.
do you know any family of that nameto be sure we do cried his father mrs. bateswe passed her housei saw miss bates at the window.
true true you are acquaintedwith miss fairfax i remember you knew her at weymouth and a finegirl she is.
call upon her by all means.there is no necessity for my calling this morning said theyoung man another day would do as well but there was that degreeof acquaintance at weymouth whichoh go today go today.
do not defer it.
what is right to be donecannot be done too soon.
and besides i must give you a hint frankany want of attention to her here should be carefully avoided.you saw her with the campbells when she was the equal of every bodyshe mixed with but here she is with a poor old grandmotherwho has barely enough to live on.
if you do not call early itwill be a slight.the son looked convinced.i have heard her speak of the acquaintance said emma she isa very elegant young woman.he agreed to it but with so quiet a yes as inclined her almostto doubt his real concurrence and yet there must be a very distinctsort of elegance for the fashionable world if jane fairfax couldbe thought only ordinarily gifted with it.if you were never particularly struck by her manners beforesaid she i think you will today.
you will see her to advantagesee her and hear herno i am afraid you will not hear her at allfor she has an aunt who never holds her tongue.you are acquainted with miss jane fairfax sir are yousaid mr. woodhouse always the last to make his way in conversationthen give me leave to assure you that you will find her a veryagreeable young lady.
she is staying here on a visit to her grandmamaand aunt very worthy people i have known them all my life.they will be extremely glad to see you i am sure and one of myservants shall go with you to shew you the way.my dear sir upon no account in the world my father can direct me.but your father is not going so far he is only going to the crownquite on the other side of the street and there are a great many housesyou might be very much at a loss and it is a very dirty walkunless you keep on the footpath but my coachman can tell youwhere you had best cross the street.mr.
frank churchill still declined it looking as serious as he couldand his father gave his hearty support by calling out my good friendthis is quite unnecessary frank knows a puddle of water when hesees it and as to mrs. batess he may get there from the crownin a hop step and jump.they were permitted to go alone and with a cordial nod from oneand a graceful bow from the other the two gentlemen took leave.emma remained very well pleased with this beginning of the acquaintanceand could now engage to think of them all at randalls any hour ofthe day with full confidence in their comfort.chapter vithe next morning brought mr. frank churchill again.
he came withmrs.
weston to whom and to highbury he seemed to take very cordially.he had been sitting with her it appeared most companionably at hometill her usual hour of exercise and on being desired to chusetheir walk immediately fixed on highbury.he did not doubt therebeing very pleasant walks in every direction but if left to himhe should always chuse the same.
highbury that airy cheerfulhappylooking highbury would be his constant attraction.highbury with mrs. weston stood for hartfield and she trusted toits bearing the same construction with him.
they walked thither directly.emma had hardly expected them  for mr. weston who had called infor half a minute in order to hear that his son was very handsomeknew nothing of their plans and it was an agreeable surprizeto her therefore to perceive them walking up to the house togetherarm in arm.
she was wanting to see him again and especiallyto see him in company with mrs. weston upon his behaviour to whomher opinion of him was to depend.
if he were deficient therenothing should make amends for it.
but on seeing them togethershe became perfectly satisfied.
it was not merely in fine wordsor hyperbolical compliment that he paid his duty nothing could bemore proper or pleasing than his whole manner to hernothing couldmore agreeably denote his wish of considering her as a friend andsecuring her affection.
and there was time enough for emma to form areasonable judgment as their visit included all the rest of the morning.they were all three walking about together for an hour or twofirst round the shrubberies of hartfield and afterwards in highbury.he was delighted with every thing admired hartfield sufficientlyfor mr. woodhouses ear and when their going farther was resolved onconfessed his wish to be made acquainted with the whole villageand found matter of commendation and interest much oftener than emmacould have supposed.some of the objects of his curiosity spoke very amiable feelings.he begged to be shewn the house which his father had lived in so longand which had been the home of his fathers father and on recollectingthat an old woman who had nursed him was still living walked in questof her cottage from one end of the street to the other and thoughin some points of pursuit or observation there was no positive meritthey shewed altogether a goodwill towards highbury in generalwhich must be very like a merit to those he was with.emma watched and decided that with such feelings as were now shewnit could not be fairly supposed that he had been ever voluntarilyabsenting himself that he had not been acting a part or makinga parade of insincere professions and that mr. knightley certainlyhad not done him justice.their first pause was at the crown inn an inconsiderable housethough the principal one of the sort where a couple of pair ofposthorses were kept more for the convenience of the neighbourhoodthan from any run on the road and his companions had not expectedto be detained by any interest excited there but in passing it theygave the history of the large room visibly added it had been builtmany years ago for a ballroom and while the neighbourhood had beenin a particularly populous dancing state had been occasionally usedas suchbut such brilliant days had long passed away and now thehighest purpose for which it was ever wanted was to accommodate a whistclub established among the gentlemen and halfgentlemen of the place.he was immediately interested.
its character as a ballroom caught himand instead of passing on he stopt for several minutes at the twosuperior sashed windows which were open to look in and contemplateits capabilities and lament that its original purpose shouldhave ceased.
he saw no fault in the room he would acknowledgenone which they suggested.
no it was long enough broad enoughhandsome enough.
it would hold the very number for comfort.they ought to have balls there at least every fortnight throughthe winter.
why had not miss woodhouse revived the former goodold days of the roomshe who could do any thing in highburythe want of proper families in the place and the convictionthat none beyond the place and its immediate environs could betempted to attend were mentioned but he was not satisfied.he could not be persuaded that so many goodlooking houses as he sawaround him could not furnish numbers enough for such a meetingand even when particulars were given and families described he wasstill unwilling to admit that the inconvenience of such a mixturewould be any thing or that there would be the smallest difficultyin every bodys returning into their proper place the next morning.he argued like a young man very much bent on dancing and emmawas rather surprized to see the constitution of the weston prevailso decidedly against the habits of the churchills.
he seemed to haveall the life and spirit cheerful feelings and social inclinationsof his father and nothing of the pride or reserve of enscombe.of pride indeed there was perhaps scarcely enough his indifferenceto a confusion of rank bordered too much on inelegance of mind.he could be no judge however of the evil he was holding cheap.it was but an effusion of lively spirits.at last he was persuaded to move on from the front of the crownand being now almost facing the house where the bateses lodgedemma recollected his intended visit the day before and asked himif he had paid it.yes oh yeshe replied i was just going to mention it.a very successful visiti saw all the three ladies and felt verymuch obliged to you for your preparatory hint.
if the talking aunthad taken me quite by surprize it must have been the death of me.as it was i was only betrayed into paying a most unreasonable visit.ten minutes would have been all that was necessary perhaps all thatwas proper and i had told my father i should certainly be at homebefore himbut there was no getting away no pause and to myutter astonishment i found when he finding me nowhere elsejoined me there at last that i had been actually sitting with themvery nearly threequarters of an hour.
the good lady had not given methe possibility of escape before.and how did you think miss fairfax lookingill very illthat is if a young lady can ever be allowed to look ill.but the expression is hardly admissible mrs. weston is itladies can never look ill.  and seriously miss fairfax is naturallyso pale as almost always to give the appearance of ill health.a most deplorable want of complexion.emma would not agree to this and began a warm defence of missfairfaxs complexion.
it was certainly never brilliant but shewould not allow it to have a sickly hue in general and there wasa softness and delicacy in her skin which gave peculiar eleganceto the character of her face.
he listened with all due deferenceacknowledged that he had heard many people say the samebut yet hemust confess that to him nothing could make amends for the wantof the fine glow of health.
where features were indifferenta fine complexion gave beauty to them all and where they were goodthe effect wasfortunately he need not attempt to describe what theeffect was.well said emma there is no disputing about taste.at leastyou admire her except her complexion.he shook his head and laughed.i cannot separate miss fairfaxand her complexion.did you see her often at weymouth  were you often in the same societyat this moment they were approaching fords and he hastily exclaimedha this must be the very shop that every body attends every dayof their lives as my father informs me.
he comes to highbury himselfhe says six days out of the seven and has always business at fords.if it be not inconvenient to you pray let us go in that i may provemyself to belong to the place to be a true citizen of highbury.i must buy something at fords.
it will be taking out my freedom.i dare say they sell gloves.oh yes gloves and every thing.
i do admire your patriotism.you will be adored in highbury.
you were very popular before you camebecause you were mr. westons sonbut lay out half a guinea atfords and your popularity will stand upon your own virtues.they went in and while the sleek welltied parcels of mens beaversand york tan were bringing down and displaying on the counterhe saidbut i beg your pardon miss woodhouse you were speakingto me you were saying something at the very moment of this burstof my amor patriae.
do not let me lose it.
i assure you the utmoststretch of public fame would not make me amends for the loss of anyhappiness in private life.i merely asked whether you had known much of miss fairfaxand her party at weymouth.and now that i understand your question i must pronounce it to be avery unfair one.
it is always the ladys right to decide on the degreeof acquaintance.
miss fairfax must already have given her account.i shall not commit myself by claiming more than she may chuse to allow.upon my word you answer as discreetly as she could do herself.but her account of every thing leaves so much to be guessedshe is so very reserved so very unwilling to give the leastinformation about any body that i really think you may say what youlike of your acquaintance with her.may i indeedthen i will speak the truth and nothing suits meso well.
i met her frequently at weymouth.
i had known the campbellsa little in town and at weymouth we were very much in the same set.colonel campbell is a very agreeable man and mrs. campbell a friendlywarmhearted woman.
i like them all.you know miss fairfaxs situation in life i conclude what sheis destined to beyesrather hesitatinglyi believe i do.you get upon delicate subjects emma said mrs. weston smilingremember that i am here.mr.
frank churchill hardly knowswhat to say when you speak of miss fairfaxs situation in life.i will move a little farther off.i certainly do forget to think of her said emma as having everbeen any thing but my friend and my dearest friend.he looked as if he fully understood and honoured such a sentiment.when the gloves were bought and they had quitted the shop againdid you ever hear the young lady we were speaking of playsaid frank churchill.ever hear her repeated emma.
you forget how much she belongsto highbury.
i have heard her every year of our lives since weboth began.
she plays charmingly.you think so do youi wanted the opinion of some one whocould really judge.
she appeared to me to play well that iswith considerable taste but i know nothing of the matter myself.i am excessively fond of music but without the smallest skillor right of judging of any bodys performance.i have been usedto hear hers admired and i remember one proof of her beingthought to play wella man a very musical man and in lovewith another womanengaged to heron the point of marriagewould yet never ask that other woman to sit down to the instrumentif the lady in question could sit down insteadnever seemedto like to hear one if he could hear the other.
that i thoughtin a man of known musical talent was some proof.proof indeed said emma highly amused.mr.
dixon is very musicalis he  we shall know more about them all in half an hour from youthan miss fairfax would have vouchsafed in half a year.yes mr. dixon and miss campbell were the persons and i thoughtit a very strong proof.certainlyvery strong it was to own the truth a great dealstronger than if i had been miss campbell would have been at allagreeable to me.
i could not excuse a mans having more musicthan lovemore ear than eyea more acute sensibility to finesounds than to my feelings.
how did miss campbell appear to like itit was her very particular friend you know.poor comfort said emma laughing.
one would rather have a strangerpreferred than ones very particular friendwith a stranger it mightnot recur againbut the misery of having a very particular friendalways at hand to do every thing better than one does oneselfpoor mrs. dixon  well i am glad she is gone to settle in ireland.you are right.
it was not very flattering to miss campbellbut she really did not seem to feel it.so much the betteror so much the worsei do not know which.but be it sweetness or be it stupidity in herquickness of friendshipor dulness of feelingthere was one person i think who must havefelt it  miss fairfax herself.
she must have felt the improperand dangerous distinction.as to thati do notoh do not imagine that i expect an account of miss fairfaxssensations from you or from any body else.
they are known to nohuman being i guess but herself.
but if she continued to playwhenever she was asked by mr. dixon one may guess what one chuses.there appeared such a perfectly good understanding among them allhe began rather quickly but checking himself added however itis impossible for me to say on what terms they really werehow it might all be behind the scenes.
i can only say that therewas smoothness outwardly.
but you who have known miss fairfax froma child must be a better judge of her character and of how sheis likely to conduct herself in critical situations than i can be.i have known her from a child undoubtedly we have been childrenand women together and it is natural to suppose that we shouldbe intimatethat we should have taken to each other whenevershe visited her friends.
but we never did.
i hardly know how ithas happened a little perhaps from that wickedness on my sidewhich was prone to take disgust towards a girl so idolizedand so cried up as she always was by her aunt and grandmotherand all their set.
and then her reservei never could attachmyself to any one so completely reserved.it is a most repulsive quality indeed said he.
oftentimesvery convenient no doubt but never pleasing.
there is safetyin reserve but no attraction.
one cannot love a reserved person.not till the reserve ceases towards oneself and then the attractionmay be the greater.
but i must be more in want of a friendor an agreeable companion than i have yet been to takethe trouble of conquering any bodys reserve to procure one.intimacy between miss fairfax and me is quite out of the question.i have no reason to think ill of hernot the leastexcept thatsuch extreme and perpetual cautiousness of word and mannersuch a dread of giving a distinct idea about any body is aptto suggest suspicions of there being something to conceal.he perfectly agreed with her  and after walking together so longand thinking so much alike emma felt herself so well acquainted with himthat she could hardly believe it to be only their second meeting.he was not exactly what she had expected less of the man of theworld in some of his notions less of the spoiled child of fortunetherefore better than she had expected.
his ideas seemed more moderatehis feelings warmer.
she was particularly struck by his mannerof considering mr. eltons house which as well as the churchhe would go and look at and would not join them in finding muchfault with.
no he could not believe it a bad house not such a houseas a man was to be pitied for having.
if it were to be shared withthe woman he loved he could not think any man to be pitied for havingthat house.
there must be ample room in it for every real comfort.the man must be a blockhead who wanted more.mrs.
weston laughed and said he did not know what he was talking about.used only to a large house himself and without ever thinking how manyadvantages and accommodations were attached to its size he couldbe no judge of the privations inevitably belonging to a small one.but emma in her own mind determined that he did know what hewas talking about and that he shewed a very amiable inclinationto settle early in life and to marry from worthy motives.he might not be aware of the inroads on domestic peace to beoccasioned by no housekeepers room or a bad butlers pantrybut no doubt he did perfectly feel that enscombe could not makehim happy and that whenever he were attached he would willinglygive up much of wealth to be allowed an early establishment.chapter viiemmas very good opinion of frank churchill was a little shakenthe following day by hearing that he was gone off to londonmerely to have his hair cut.
a sudden freak seemed to have seized himat breakfast and he had sent for a chaise and set off intending toreturn to dinner but with no more important view that appeared thanhaving his hair cut.
there was certainly no harm in his travellingsixteen miles twice over on such an errand but there was an airof foppery and nonsense in it which she could not approve.
it didnot accord with the rationality of plan the moderation in expenseor even the unselfish warmth of heart which she had believed herselfto discern in him yesterday.
vanity extravagance love of changerestlessness of temper which must be doing something good or badheedlessness as to the pleasure of his father and mrs. westonindifferent as to how his conduct might appear in general he becameliable to all these charges.
his father only called him a coxcomband thought it a very good story but that mrs. weston did not like itwas clear enough by her passing it over as quickly as possibleand making no other comment than that all young people would havetheir little whims.with the exception of this little blot emma found that his visithitherto had given her friend only good ideas of him.
mrs. westonwas very ready to say how attentive and pleasant a companion hemade himselfhow much she saw to like in his disposition altogether.he appeared to have a very open tempercertainly a very cheerfuland lively one she could observe nothing wrong in his notionsa great deal decidedly right he spoke of his uncle with warm regardwas fond of talking of himsaid he would be the best man in theworld if he were left to himself and though there was no beingattached to the aunt he acknowledged her kindness with gratitudeand seemed to mean always to speak of her with respect.this was all very promising and but for such an unfortunate fancyfor having his hair cut there was nothing to denote him unworthyof the distinguished honour which her imagination had given himthe honour if not of being really in love with her of beingat least very near it and saved only by her own indifferencefor still her resolution held of never marryingthe honour in shortof being marked out for her by all their joint acquaintance.mr.
weston on his side added a virtue to the account which musthave some weight.
he gave her to understand that frank admiredher extremelythought her very beautiful and very charmingand with so much to be said for him altogether she found she mustnot judge him harshly.
as mrs. weston observed all young peoplewould have their little whims.there was one person among his new acquaintance in surry not soleniently disposed.
in general he was judged throughout the parishesof donwell and highbury with great candour liberal allowanceswere made for the little excesses of such a handsome young manone who smiled so often and bowed so well but there was one spiritamong them not to be softened from its power of censure by bowsor smilesmr.
knightley.
the circumstance was told him at hartfieldfor the moment he was silent but emma heard him almost immediatelyafterwards say to himself over a newspaper he held in his handhum just the trifling silly fellow i took him for.
she hadhalf a mind to resent but an instants observation convincedher that it was really said only to relieve his own feelingsand not meant to provoke and therefore she let it pass.although in one instance the bearers of not good tidingsmr.
and mrs. westons visit this morning was in another respectparticularly opportune.
something occurred while they wereat hartfield to make emma want their advice and which wasstill more lucky she wanted exactly the advice they gave.this was the occurrencethe coles had been settled some yearsin highbury and were very good sort of peoplefriendly liberaland unpretending but on the other hand they were of low originin trade and only moderately genteel.
on their first coming intothe country they had lived in proportion to their income quietlykeeping little company and that little unexpensively but the lastyear or two had brought them a considerable increase of meansthe house in town had yielded greater profits and fortune in generalhad smiled on them.
with their wealth their views increasedtheir want of a larger house their inclination for more company.they added to their house to their number of servantsto their expenses of every sort and by this time were in fortuneand style of living second only to the family at hartfield.their love of society and their new diningroom prepared every bodyfor their keeping dinnercompany and a few parties chiefly amongthe single men had already taken place.
the regular and bestfamilies emma could hardly suppose they would presume to inviteneither donwell nor hartfield nor randalls.
nothing shouldtempt her to go if they did and she regretted that her fathersknown habits would be giving her refusal less meaning than shecould wish.
the coles were very respectable in their way but theyought to be taught that it was not for them to arrange the termson which the superior families would visit them.
this lessonshe very much feared they would receive only from herselfshe had little hope of mr. knightley none of mr. weston.but she had made up her mind how to meet this presumption so manyweeks before it appeared that when the insult came at lastit found her very differently affected.
donwell and randallshad received their invitation and none had come for her fatherand herself and mrs. westons accounting for it with i supposethey will not take the liberty with you they know you do notdine out was not quite sufficient.
she felt that she shouldlike to have had the power of refusal and afterwards as the ideaof the party to be assembled there consisting precisely of thosewhose society was dearest to her occurred again and againshe did not know that she might not have been tempted to accept.harriet was to be there in the evening and the bateses.
they hadbeen speaking of it as they walked about highbury the day beforeand frank churchill had most earnestly lamented her absence.might not the evening end in a dance had been a question of his.the bare possibility of it acted as a farther irritation on her spiritsand her being left in solitary grandeur even supposing the omissionto be intended as a compliment was but poor comfort.it was the arrival of this very invitation while the westons wereat hartfield which made their presence so acceptable for though herfirst remark on reading it was that of course it must be declinedshe so very soon proceeded to ask them what they advised her to dothat their advice for her going was most prompt and successful.she owned that considering every thing she was not absolutelywithout inclination for the party.
the coles expressed themselvesso properlythere was so much real attention in the manner of itso much consideration for her father.
they would have solicited thehonour earlier but had been waiting the arrival of a foldingscreenfrom london which they hoped might keep mr. woodhouse from any draughtof air and therefore induce him the more readily to give them thehonour of his company.
upon the whole she was very persuadableand it being briefly settled among themselves how it might bedone without neglecting his comforthow certainly mrs. goddardif not mrs. bates might be depended on for bearing him companymr.
woodhouse was to be talked into an acquiescence of his daughtersgoing out to dinner on a day now near at hand and spendingthe whole evening away from him.
as for his going emma didnot wish him to think it possible the hours would be too lateand the party too numerous.
he was soon pretty well resigned.i am not fond of dinnervisiting said hei never was.no more is emma.
late hours do not agree with us.
i am sorrymr.
and mrs. cole should have done it.
i think it would bemuch better if they would come in one afternoon next summerand take their tea with ustake us in their afternoon walkwhich they might do as our hours are so reasonable and yet get homewithout being out in the damp of the evening.
the dews of a summerevening are what i would not expose any body to.
however as theyare so very desirous to have dear emma dine with them and as youwill both be there and mr. knightley too to take care of heri cannot wish to prevent it provided the weather be what it oughtneither damp nor cold nor windy.
then turning to mrs. westonwith a look of gentle reproachah  miss taylor if you hadnot married you would have staid at home with me.well sir cried mr. weston as i took miss taylor awayit is incumbent on me to supply her place if i can and i willstep to mrs. goddard in a moment if you wish it.but the idea of any thing to be done in a moment was increasingnot lessening mr. woodhouses agitation.
the ladies knew betterhow to allay it.
mr. weston must be quiet and every thingdeliberately arranged.with this treatment mr. woodhouse was soon composed enoughfor talking as usual.
he should be happy to see mrs. goddard.he had a great regard for mrs. goddard and emma should write a lineand invite her.
james could take the note.
but first of allthere must be an answer written to mrs. cole.you will make my excuses my dear as civilly as possible.
you willsay that i am quite an invalid and go no where and therefore mustdecline their obliging invitation beginning with my complimentsof course.
but you will do every thing right.
i need not tell youwhat is to be done.
we must remember to let james know that the carriagewill be wanted on tuesday.
i shall have no fears for you with him.we have never been there above once since the new approach was madebut still i have no doubt that james will take you very safely.and when you get there you must tell him at what time you wouldhave him come for you again and you had better name an early hour.you will not like staying late.
you will get very tired when teais over.but you would not wish me to come away before i am tired papaoh no my love but you will soon be tired.
there will bea great many people talking at once.
you will not like the noise.but my dear sir cried mr. weston if emma comes away earlyit will be breaking up the party.and no great harm if it does said mr. woodhouse.
the soonerevery party breaks up the better.but you do not consider how it may appear to the coles.emmas going away directly after tea might be giving offence.they are goodnatured people and think little of their own claimsbut still they must feel that any bodys hurrying away is nogreat compliment and miss woodhouses doing it would be more thoughtof than any other persons in the room.
you would not wish to disappointand mortify the coles i am sure sir friendly good sort of peopleas ever lived and who have been your neighbours these ten years.no upon no account in the world mr. weston i am much obligedto you for reminding me.
i should be extremely sorry to be givingthem any pain.
i know what worthy people they are.
perry tellsme that mr. cole never touches malt liquor.
you would not thinkit to look at him but he is biliousmr.
cole is very bilious.no i would not be the means of giving them any pain.
my dear emmawe must consider this.
i am sure rather than run the risk of hurtingmr.
and mrs. cole you would stay a little longer than you might wish.you will not regard being tired.
you will be perfectly safeyou know among your friends.oh yes papa.
i have no fears at all for myself and i should haveno scruples of staying as late as mrs. weston but on your account.i am only afraid of your sitting up for me.
i am not afraidof your not being exceedingly comfortable with mrs. goddard.she loves piquet you know but when she is gone home i am afraidyou will be sitting up by yourself instead of going to bed at yourusual timeand the idea of that would entirely destroy my comfort.you must promise me not to sit up.he did on the condition of some promises on her side  such as thatif she came home cold she would be sure to warm herself thoroughlyif hungry that she would take something to eat that her own maidshould sit up for her and that serle and the butler should seethat every thing were safe in the house as usual.chapter viiifrank churchill came back again and if he kept his fathersdinner waiting it was not known at hartfield for mrs. westonwas too anxious for his being a favourite with mr. woodhouseto betray any imperfection which could be concealed.he came back had had his hair cut and laughed at himself witha very good grace but without seeming really at all ashamedof what he had done.
he had no reason to wish his hair longerto conceal any confusion of face no reason to wish the money unspentto improve his spirits.
he was quite as undaunted and as livelyas ever and after seeing him emma thus moralised to herselfi do not know whether it ought to be so but certainly silly thingsdo cease to be silly if they are done by sensible people in animpudent way.
wickedness is always wickedness but folly is notalways folly.it depends upon the character of those who handle it.mr.
knightley he is not a trifling silly young man.
if he werehe would have done this differently.
he would either have gloriedin the achievement or been ashamed of it.
there would have beeneither the ostentation of a coxcomb or the evasions of a mind tooweak to defend its own vanities.no i am perfectly sure that heis not trifling or silly.with tuesday came the agreeable prospect of seeing him againand for a longer time than hitherto of judging of his general mannersand by inference of the meaning of his manners towards herselfof guessing how soon it might be necessary for her to throw coldnessinto her air and of fancying what the observations of all thosemight be who were now seeing them together for the first time.she meant to be very happy in spite of the scene being laid atmr.
coles and without being able to forget that among the failingsof mr. elton even in the days of his favour none had disturbedher more than his propensity to dine with mr. cole.her fathers comfort was amply secured mrs. bates as well asmrs.
goddard being able to come and her last pleasing dutybefore she left the house was to pay her respects to them asthey sat together after dinner and while her father was fondlynoticing the beauty of her dress to make the two ladies allthe amends in her power by helping them to large slices of cakeand full glasses of wine for whatever unwilling selfdenial hiscare of their constitution might have obliged them to practiseduring the meal.she had provided a plentiful dinner for themshe wished she could know that they had been allowed to eat it.she followed another carriage to mr. coles door and was pleasedto see that it was mr. knightleys for mr. knightley keepingno horses having little spare money and a great deal of healthactivity and independence was too apt in emmas opinion to getabout as he could and not use his carriage so often as becamethe owner of donwell abbey.
she had an opportunity now of speakingher approbation while warm from her heart for he stopped to hand her out.this is coming as you should do said she like a gentleman.i am quite glad to see you.he thanked her observing how lucky that we should arrive at the samemoment for if we had met first in the drawingroom i doubt whetheryou would have discerned me to be more of a gentleman than usual.you might not have distinguished how i came by my look or manner.yes i should i am sure i should.
there is always a look ofconsciousness or bustle when people come in a way which they knowto be beneath them.
you think you carry it off very well i dare saybut with you it is a sort of bravado an air of affected unconcerni always observe it whenever i meet you under those circumstances.now you have nothing to try for.
you are not afraid of beingsupposed ashamed.
you are not striving to look taller than anybody else.
now i shall really be very happy to walk into the sameroom with you.nonsensical girl was his reply but not at all in anger.emma had as much reason to be satisfied with the rest of the partyas with mr. knightley.
she was received with a cordial respectwhich could not but please and given all the consequence she couldwish for.
when the westons arrived the kindest looks of lovethe strongest of admiration were for her from both husband and wifethe son approached her with a cheerful eagerness which markedher as his peculiar object and at dinner she found him seatedby herand as she firmly believed not without some dexterityon his side.the party was rather large as it included one other family a properunobjectionable country family whom the coles had the advantage ofnaming among their acquaintance and the male part of mr. coxs familythe lawyer of highbury.
the less worthy females were to comein the evening with miss bates miss fairfax and miss smithbut already at dinner they were too numerous for any subjectof conversation to be general and while politics and mr. eltonwere talked over emma could fairly surrender all her attention tothe pleasantness of her neighbour.
the first remote sound to whichshe felt herself obliged to attend was the name of jane fairfax.mrs.
cole seemed to be relating something of her that was expected to bevery interesting.
she listened and found it well worth listening to.that very dear part of emma her fancy received an amusing supply.mrs.
cole was telling that she had been calling on miss batesand as soon as she entered the room had been struck by the sightof a pianofortea very elegant looking instrumentnot a grandbut a largesized square pianoforte and the substance of the storythe end of all the dialogue which ensued of surprize and inquiryand congratulations on her side and explanations on miss batess wasthat this pianoforte had arrived from broadwoods the day beforeto the great astonishment of both aunt and nieceentirely unexpectedthat at first by miss batess account jane herself was quite ata loss quite bewildered to think who could possibly have ordered itbut now they were both perfectly satisfied that it could be from onlyone quarterof course it must be from colonel campbell.one can suppose nothing else added mrs. cole and i was onlysurprized that there could ever have been a doubt.
but janeit seems had a letter from them very lately and not a word was saidabout it.
she knows their ways best but i should not consider theirsilence as any reason for their not meaning to make the present.they might chuse to surprize her.mrs.
cole had many to agree with her every body who spoke on thesubject was equally convinced that it must come from colonel campbelland equally rejoiced that such a present had been made and therewere enough ready to speak to allow emma to think her own wayand still listen to mrs. cole.i declare i do not know when i have heard any thing that has givenme more satisfactionit always has quite hurt me that jane fairfaxwho plays so delightfully should not have an instrument.it seemed quite a shame especially considering how many housesthere are where fine instruments are absolutely thrown away.this is like giving ourselves a slap to be sure and it wasbut yesterday i was telling mr. cole i really was ashamedto look at our new grand pianoforte in the drawingroom while ido not know one note from another and our little girls who arebut just beginning perhaps may never make any thing of itand there is poor jane fairfax who is mistress of music has notany thing of the nature of an instrument not even the pitifullestold spinet in the world to amuse herself with.i was saying thisto mr. cole but yesterday and he quite agreed with me only heis so particularly fond of music that he could not help indulginghimself in the purchase hoping that some of our good neighbours mightbe so obliging occasionally to put it to a better use than we canand that really is the reason why the instrument was boughtor else i am sure we ought to be ashamed of it.we are in greathopes that miss woodhouse may be prevailed with to try it this evening.miss woodhouse made the proper acquiescence and finding that nothingmore was to be entrapped from any communication of mrs. colesturned to frank churchill.why do you smile said she.nay why do youmei suppose i smile for pleasure at colonel campbells beingso rich and so liberal.it is a handsome present.very.i rather wonder that it was never made before.perhaps miss fairfax has never been staying here so long before.or that he did not give her the use of their own instrumentwhich must now be shut up in london untouched by any body.that is a grand pianoforte and he might think it too largefor mrs. batess house.you may say what you chusebut your countenance testifiesthat your thoughts on this subject are very much like mine.i do not know.
i rather believe you are giving me more credit foracuteness than i deserve.
i smile because you smile and shall probablysuspect whatever i find you suspect but at present i do not see whatthere is to question.
if colonel campbell is not the person who can bewhat do you say to mrs. dixonmrs.
dixon very true indeed.
i had not thought of mrs. dixon.she must know as well as her father how acceptable an instrumentwould be and perhaps the mode of it the mystery the surprizeis more like a young womans scheme than an elderly mans.
itis mrs. dixon i dare say.
i told you that your suspicions wouldguide mine.if so you must extend your suspicions and comprehend mr. dixonin them.mr.
dixon.very well.
yes i immediately perceive that it mustbe the joint present of mr. and mrs. dixon.
we were speaking theother day you know of his being so warm an admirer of her performance.yes and what you told me on that head confirmed an idea which ihad entertained before.i do not mean to reflect upon the goodintentions of either mr. dixon or miss fairfax but i cannot helpsuspecting either that after making his proposals to her friendhe had the misfortune to fall in love with her or that he becameconscious of a little attachment on her side.
one might guesstwenty things without guessing exactly the right but i am surethere must be a particular cause for her chusing to come to highburyinstead of going with the campbells to ireland.
here she must beleading a life of privation and penance there it would have beenall enjoyment.
as to the pretence of trying her native air i lookupon that as a mere excuse.in the summer it might have passedbut what can any bodys native air do for them in the monthsof january february and march  good fires and carriages wouldbe much more to the purpose in most cases of delicate health and idare say in hers.
i do not require you to adopt all my suspicionsthough you make so noble a profession of doing it but i honestlytell you what they are.and upon my word they have an air of great probability.mr.
dixons preference of her music to her friends i can answerfor being very decided.and then he saved her life.
did you ever hear of thata water party and by some accident she was falling overboard.he caught her.he did.
i was thereone of the party.were you reallywellbut you observed nothing of coursefor it seems to be a new idea to you.if i had been there i thinki should have made some discoveries.i dare say you would but i simple i saw nothing but the factthat miss fairfax was nearly dashed from the vessel and that mr. dixoncaught her.it was the work of a moment.
and though the consequentshock and alarm was very great and much more durableindeed ibelieve it was half an hour before any of us were comfortable againyet that was too general a sensation for any thing of peculiaranxiety to be observable.
i do not mean to say however that youmight not have made discoveries.the conversation was here interrupted.
they were called on to sharein the awkwardness of a rather long interval between the coursesand obliged to be as formal and as orderly as the others but whenthe table was again safely covered when every corner dish was placedexactly right and occupation and ease were generally restoredemma saidthe arrival of this pianoforte is decisive with me.
i wanted to knowa little more and this tells me quite enough.
depend upon itwe shall soon hear that it is a present from mr. and mrs. dixon.and if the dixons should absolutely deny all knowledge of it wemust conclude it to come from the campbells.no i am sure it is not from the campbells.
miss fairfax knows itis not from the campbells or they would have been guessed at first.she would not have been puzzled had she dared fix on them.i may not have convinced you perhaps but i am perfectly convincedmyself that mr. dixon is a principal in the business.indeed you injure me if you suppose me unconvinced.
your reasoningscarry my judgment along with them entirely.
at first while isupposed you satisfied that colonel campbell was the giver i sawit only as paternal kindness and thought it the most natural thingin the world.
but when you mentioned mrs. dixon i felt how much moreprobable that it should be the tribute of warm female friendship.and now i can see it in no other light than as an offering of love.there was no occasion to press the matter farther.
the convictionseemed real he looked as if he felt it.
she said no moreother subjects took their turn and the rest of the dinner passed awaythe dessert succeeded the children came in and were talkedto and admired amid the usual rate of conversation a few cleverthings said a few downright silly but by much the larger proportionneither the one nor the othernothing worse than everyday remarksdull repetitions old news and heavy jokes.the ladies had not been long in the drawingroom before the other ladiesin their different divisions arrived.
emma watched the entree of herown particular little friend and if she could not exult in her dignityand grace she could not only love the blooming sweetness and theartless manner but could most heartily rejoice in that light cheerfulunsentimental disposition which allowed her so many alleviationsof pleasure in the midst of the pangs of disappointed affection.there she satand who would have guessed how many tears she hadbeen lately shedding  to be in company nicely dressed herselfand seeing others nicely dressed to sit and smile and look prettyand say nothing was enough for the happiness of the present hour.jane fairfax did look and move superior but emma suspected shemight have been glad to change feelings with harriet very gladto have purchased the mortification of having lovedyes of havingloved even mr. elton in vainby the surrender of all the dangerouspleasure of knowing herself beloved by the husband of her friend.in so large a party it was not necessary that emma should approach her.she did not wish to speak of the pianoforte she felt too muchin the secret herself to think the appearance of curiosityor interest fair and therefore purposely kept at a distancebut by the others the subject was almost immediately introducedand she saw the blush of consciousness with which congratulationswere received the blush of guilt which accompanied the name of myexcellent friend colonel campbell.mrs.
weston kindhearted and musical was particularly interestedby the circumstance and emma could not help being amused at herperseverance in dwelling on the subject and having so much to askand to say as to tone touch and pedal totally unsuspiciousof that wish of saying as little about it as possible which sheplainly read in the fair heroines countenance.they were soon joined by some of the gentlemen and the very first of theearly was frank churchill.
in he walked the first and the handsomestand after paying his compliments en passant to miss bates andher niece made his way directly to the opposite side of the circlewhere sat miss woodhouse and till he could find a seat by herwould not sit at all.
emma divined what every body present mustbe thinking.
she was his object and every body must perceive it.she introduced him to her friend miss smith and at convenientmoments afterwards heard what each thought of the other.
he hadnever seen so lovely a face and was delighted with her naivete.and she only to be sure it was paying him too great a complimentbut she did think there were some looks a little like mr. elton.emma restrained her indignation and only turned from her in silence.smiles of intelligence passed between her and the gentleman on firstglancing towards miss fairfax but it was most prudent to avoid speech.he told her that he had been impatient to leave the diningroomhated sitting longwas always the first to move when he couldthat his father mr. knightley mr. cox and mr. cole were leftvery busy over parish businessthat as long as he had staidhowever it had been pleasant enough as he had found them in generala set of gentlemanlike sensible men and spoke so handsomely ofhighbury altogetherthought it so abundant in agreeable familiesthat emma began to feel she had been used to despise the placerather too much.
she questioned him as to the society in yorkshirethe extent of the neighbourhood about enscombe and the sortand could make out from his answers that as far as enscombewas concerned there was very little going on that their visitingswere among a range of great families none very near and that evenwhen days were fixed and invitations accepted it was an evenchance that mrs. churchill were not in health and spirits for goingthat they made a point of visiting no fresh person and thatthough he had his separate engagements it was not without difficultywithout considerable address at times that he could get awayor introduce an acquaintance for a night.she saw that enscombe could not satisfy and that highburytaken at its best might reasonably please a young man who had moreretirement at home than he liked.
his importance at enscombe wasvery evident.
he did not boast but it naturally betrayed itselfthat he had persuaded his aunt where his uncle could do nothingand on her laughing and noticing it he owned that he believed exceptingone or two points he could with time persuade her to any thing.one of those points on which his influence failed he then mentioned.he had wanted very much to go abroadhad been very eager indeedto be allowed to travelbut she would not hear of it.
this hadhappened the year before.
now he said he was beginning to haveno longer the same wish.the unpersuadable point which he did not mention emma guessedto be good behaviour to his father.i have made a most wretched discovery said he after a short pause.i have been here a week tomorrowhalf my time.
i never knewdays fly so fast.
a week tomorrowand i have hardly begun toenjoy myself.
but just got acquainted with mrs. weston and othersi hate the recollection.perhaps you may now begin to regret that you spent one whole dayout of so few in having your hair cut.no said he smiling that is no subject of regret at all.i have no pleasure in seeing my friends unless i can believe myselffit to be seen.the rest of the gentlemen being now in the room emma found herselfobliged to turn from him for a few minutes and listen to mr. cole.when mr. cole had moved away and her attention could be restoredas before she saw frank churchill looking intently across the roomat miss fairfax who was sitting exactly opposite.what is the matter said she.he started.
thank you for rousing me he replied.
i believei have been very rude but really miss fairfax has done her hairin so odd a wayso very odd a waythat i cannot keep my eyesfrom her.
i never saw any thing so outreethose curlsthis mustbe a fancy of her own.
i see nobody else looking like heri must go and ask her whether it is an irish fashion.
shall iyes i willi declare i willand you shall see how she takes itwhether she colours.he was gone immediately and emma soon saw him standing before missfairfax and talking to her but as to its effect on the young ladyas he had improvidently placed himself exactly between them exactlyin front of miss fairfax she could absolutely distinguish nothing.before he could return to his chair it was taken by mrs. weston.this is the luxury of a large party said sheone can getnear every body and say every thing.
my dear emma i am longingto talk to you.
i have been making discoveries and forming plansjust like yourself and i must tell them while the idea is fresh.do you know how miss bates and her niece came herehowthey were invited were not theyoh yesbut how they were conveyed hitherthe manner of their comingthey walked i conclude.
how else could they comevery true.well a little while ago it occurred to me how very sadit would be to have jane fairfax walking home again late at nightand cold as the nights are now.
and as i looked at her though inever saw her appear to more advantage it struck me that shewas heated and would therefore be particularly liable to take cold.poor girl  i could not bear the idea of it so as soon as mr. westoncame into the room and i could get at him i spoke to him aboutthe carriage.
you may guess how readily he came into my wishesand having his approbation i made my way directly to miss batesto assure her that the carriage would be at her service before it tookus home for i thought it would be making her comfortable at once.good soul she was as grateful as possible you may be sure.nobody was ever so fortunate as herselfbut with manymany thanksthere was no occasion to trouble us for mr. knightleyscarriage had brought and was to take them home again.
i wasquite surprizedvery glad i am sure but really quite surprized.such a very kind attentionand so thoughtful an attentionthe sort of thing that so few men would think of.
and in shortfrom knowing his usual ways i am very much inclined to thinkthat it was for their accommodation the carriage was used at all.i do suspect he would not have had a pair of horses for himselfand that it was only as an excuse for assisting them.very likely said emmanothing more likely.
i know no manmore likely than mr. knightley to do the sort of thingto do anything really goodnatured useful considerate or benevolent.he is not a gallant man but he is a very humane one and thisconsidering jane fairfaxs illhealth would appear a caseof humanity to himand for an act of unostentatious kindnessthere is nobody whom i would fix on more than on mr. knightley.i know he had horses todayfor we arrived together and i laughed athim about it but he said not a word that could betray.well said mrs. weston smiling you give him credit formore simple disinterested benevolence in this instance than i dofor while miss bates was speaking a suspicion darted into my headand i have never been able to get it out again.
the more i thinkof it the more probable it appears.
in short i have made a matchbetween mr. knightley and jane fairfax.
see the consequenceof keeping you companywhat do you say to itmr.
knightley and jane fairfax exclaimed emma.
dear mrs. westonhow could you think of such a thingmr.
knightleymr.
knightleymust not marryyou would not have little henry cut out from donwelloh no no henry must have donwell.
i cannot at all consent tomr.
knightleys marrying and i am sure it is not at all likely.i am amazed that you should think of such a thing.my dear emma i have told you what led me to think of it.i do not want the matchi do not want to injure dear little henrybut the idea has been given me by circumstances and if mr. knightleyreally wished to marry you would not have him refrain on henrysaccount a boy of six years old who knows nothing of the matteryes i would.
i could not bear to have henry supplanted.mr.
knightley marryno i have never had such an idea and icannot adopt it now.
and jane fairfax too of all womennay she has always been a first favourite with him as youvery well know.but the imprudence of such a matchi am not speaking of its prudence merely its probability.i see no probability in it unless you have any better foundationthan what you mention.
his goodnature his humanity as i tell youwould be quite enough to account for the horses.
he has a greatregard for the bateses you know independent of jane fairfaxand is always glad to shew them attention.
my dear mrs. westondo not take to matchmaking.
you do it very ill.  jane fairfax mistressof the abbeyoh no noevery feeling revolts.
for his own sakei would not have him do so mad a thing.imprudent if you pleasebut not mad.
excepting inequality of fortuneand perhaps a little disparity of age i can see nothing unsuitable.but mr. knightley does not want to marry.
i am sure he has not theleast idea of it.
do not put it into his head.
why should he marryhe is as happy as possible by himself with his farm and his sheepand his library and all the parish to manage and he is extremelyfond of his brothers children.
he has no occasion to marryeither to fill up his time or his heart.my dear emma as long as he thinks so it is so but if he reallyloves jane fairfaxnonsense  he does not care about jane fairfax.
in the wayof love i am sure he does not.
he would do any good to heror her family butwell said mrs. weston laughing perhaps the greatest good hecould do them would be to give jane such a respectable home.if it would be good to her i am sure it would be evil to himselfa very shameful and degrading connexion.
how would he bear to havemiss bates belonging to himto have her haunting the abbeyand thanking him all day long for his great kindness in marrying janeso very kind and obligingbut he always had been such a verykind neighbour  and then fly off through half a sentenceto her mothers old petticoat.
not that it was such a very oldpetticoat eitherfor still it would last a great whileand indeedshe must thankfully say that their petticoats were all very strong.for shame emma  do not mimic her.
you divert me againstmy conscience.
and upon my word i do not think mr. knightley wouldbe much disturbed by miss bates.
little things do not irritate him.she might talk on and if he wanted to say any thing himself he wouldonly talk louder and drown her voice.
but the question is notwhether it would be a bad connexion for him but whether he wishes itand i think he does.
i have heard him speak and so must youso very highly of jane fairfax  the interest he takes in herhis anxiety about her healthhis concern that she should have nohappier prospect  i have heard him express himself so warmly onthose pointssuch an admirer of her performance on the pianoforteand of her voice  i have heard him say that he could listen to herfor ever.
oh and i had almost forgotten one idea that occurredto methis pianoforte that has been sent here by somebodythough we have all been so well satisfied to consider it a presentfrom the campbells may it not be from mr. knightley  i cannothelp suspecting him.
i think he is just the person to do iteven without being in love.then it can be no argument to prove that he is in love.but i do not think it is at all a likely thing for him to do.mr.
knightley does nothing mysteriously.i have heard him lamenting her having no instrument repeatedlyoftener than i should suppose such a circumstance would in the commoncourse of things occur to him.very well and if he had intended to give her one he would havetold her so.there might be scruples of delicacy my dear emma.
i have a verystrong notion that it comes from him.
i am sure he was particularlysilent when mrs. cole told us of it at dinner.you take up an idea mrs. weston and run away with it as you havemany a time reproached me with doing.
i see no sign of attachmenti believe nothing of the pianoforteand proof only shall convinceme that mr. knightley has any thought of marrying jane fairfax.they combated the point some time longer in the same way emma rathergaining ground over the mind of her friend for mrs. weston wasthe most used of the two to yield till a little bustle in the roomshewed them that tea was over and the instrument in preparationand at the same moment mr. cole approaching to entreat miss woodhousewould do them the honour of trying it.
frank churchill of whomin the eagerness of her conversation with mrs. weston she had beenseeing nothing except that he had found a seat by miss fairfaxfollowed mr. cole to add his very pressing entreaties and asin every respect it suited emma best to lead she gave a veryproper compliance.she knew the limitations of her own powers too well to attemptmore than she could perform with credit she wanted neither tastenor spirit in the little things which are generally acceptableand could accompany her own voice well.
one accompaniment to her songtook her agreeably by surprizea second slightly but correctlytaken by frank churchill.
her pardon was duly begged at the closeof the song and every thing usual followed.
he was accusedof having a delightful voice and a perfect knowledge of musicwhich was properly denied and that he knew nothing of the matterand had no voice at all roundly asserted.
they sang togetheronce more and emma would then resign her place to miss fairfaxwhose performance both vocal and instrumental she never couldattempt to conceal from herself was infinitely superior to her own.with mixed feelings she seated herself at a little distance from thenumbers round the instrument to listen.
frank churchill sang again.they had sung together once or twice it appeared at weymouth.but the sight of mr. knightley among the most attentive soon drewaway half emmas mind and she fell into a train of thinkingon the subject of mrs. westons suspicions to which the sweetsounds of the united voices gave only momentary interruptions.her objections to mr. knightleys marrying did not in the least subside.she could see nothing but evil in it.
it would be a greatdisappointment to mr. john knightley consequently to isabella.a real injury to the childrena most mortifying changeand material loss to them alla very great deduction from herfathers daily comfortand as to herself she could not at allendure the idea of jane fairfax at donwell abbey.
a mrs. knightleyfor them all to give way tonomr.
knightley must never marry.little henry must remain the heir of donwell.presently mr. knightley looked back and came and sat down by her.they talked at first only of the performance.
his admirationwas certainly very warm yet she thought but for mrs. westonit would not have struck her.
as a sort of touchstone howevershe began to speak of his kindness in conveying the aunt and nieceand though his answer was in the spirit of cutting the matter shortshe believed it to indicate only his disinclination to dwell on anykindness of his own.i often feel concern said she that i dare not make our carriagemore useful on such occasions.
it is not that i am without the wishbut you know how impossible my father would deem it that jamesshould putto for such a purpose.quite out of the question quite out of the question he repliedbut you must often wish it i am sure.
and he smiled with suchseeming pleasure at the conviction that she must proceed another step.this present from the campbells said shethis pianoforteis very kindly given.yes he replied and without the smallest apparent embarrassment.but they would have done better had they given her notice of it.surprizes are foolish things.
the pleasure is not enhanced and theinconvenience is often considerable.
i should have expected betterjudgment in colonel campbell.from that moment emma could have taken her oath that mr. knightleyhad had no concern in giving the instrument.
but whether hewere entirely free from peculiar attachmentwhether therewere no actual preferenceremained a little longer doubtful.towards the end of janes second song her voice grew thick.that will do said he when it was finished thinking aloudyou have sung quite enough for one eveningnow be quiet.another song however was soon begged for.
one morethey wouldnot fatigue miss fairfax on any account and would only ask forone more.
and frank churchill was heard to say i think you couldmanage this without effort the first part is so very trifling.the strength of the song falls on the second.mr.
knightley grew angry.that fellow said he indignantly thinks of nothing but shewingoff his own voice.
this must not be.
and touching miss bateswho at that moment passed nearmiss bates are you mad to letyour niece sing herself hoarse in this manner  go and interfere.they have no mercy on her.miss bates in her real anxiety for jane could hardly stay evento be grateful before she stept forward and put an end to allfarther singing.
here ceased the concert part of the eveningfor miss woodhouse and miss fairfax were the only young lady performersbut soon within five minutes the proposal of dancingoriginating nobody exactly knew wherewas so effectually promotedby mr. and mrs. cole that every thing was rapidly clearing awayto give proper space.
mrs. weston capital in her countrydanceswas seated and beginning an irresistible waltz and frank churchillcoming up with most becoming gallantry to emma had secured her handand led her up to the top.while waiting till the other young people could pair themselves offemma found time in spite of the compliments she was receiving on hervoice and her taste to look about and see what became of mr. knightley.this would be a trial.
he was no dancer in general.
if he were to bevery alert in engaging jane fairfax now it might augur something.there was no immediate appearance.
no he was talking to mrs. colehe was looking on unconcerned jane was asked by somebody elseand he was still talking to mrs. cole.emma had no longer an alarm for henry his interest was yet safeand she led off the dance with genuine spirit and enjoyment.not more than five couple could be mustered but the rarity and thesuddenness of it made it very delightful and she found herself wellmatched in a partner.
they were a couple worth looking at.two dances unfortunately were all that could be allowed.it was growing late and miss bates became anxious to get homeon her mothers account.
after some attempts therefore to bepermitted to begin again they were obliged to thank mrs. westonlook sorrowful and have done.perhaps it is as well said frank churchill as he attended emmato her carriage.
i must have asked miss fairfax and her languiddancing would not have agreed with me after yours.chapter ixemma did not repent her condescension in going to the coles.the visit afforded her many pleasant recollections the next dayand all that she might be supposed to have lost on the sideof dignified seclusion must be amply repaid in the splendourof popularity.
she must have delighted the colesworthy peoplewho deserved to be made happyand left a name behind her that wouldnot soon die away.perfect happiness even in memory is not common and there weretwo points on which she was not quite easy.
she doubted whethershe had not transgressed the duty of woman by woman in betrayingher suspicions of jane fairfaxs feelings to frank churchill.it was hardly right but it had been so strong an idea that itwould escape her and his submission to all that she toldwas a compliment to her penetration which made it difficultfor her to be quite certain that she ought to have held her tongue.the other circumstance of regret related also to jane fairfaxand there she had no doubt.
she did unfeignedly and unequivocallyregret the inferiority of her own playing and singing.
she didmost heartily grieve over the idleness of her childhoodand satdown and practised vigorously an hour and a half.she was then interrupted by harriets coming in and if harrietspraise could have satisfied her she might soon have been comforted.oh if i could but play as well as you and miss fairfaxdont class us together harriet.
my playing is no more likehers than a lamp is like sunshine.oh deari think you play the best of the two.
i think you playquite as well as she does.
i am sure i had much rather hear you.every body last night said how well you played.those who knew any thing about it must have felt the difference.the truth is harriet that my playing is just good enough to be praisedbut jane fairfaxs is much beyond it.well i always shall think that you play quite as well as she doesor that if there is any difference nobody would ever find it out.mr.
cole said how much taste you had and mr. frank churchill talkeda great deal about your taste and that he valued taste much morethan execution.ah but jane fairfax has them both harriet.are you sure  i saw she had execution but i did not know she hadany taste.
nobody talked about it.
and i hate italian singing.there is no understanding a word of it.
besides if she does playso very well you know it is no more than she is obliged to dobecause she will have to teach.
the coxes were wondering last nightwhether she would get into any great family.
how did you think thecoxes lookedjust as they always dovery vulgar.they told me something said harriet rather hesitatinglybut it is nothing of any consequence.emma was obliged to ask what they had told her though fearfulof its producing mr. elton.they told methat mr. martin dined with them last saturday.ohhe came to their father upon some business and he asked himto stay to dinner.ohthey talked a great deal about him especially anne cox.i do not know what she meant but she asked me if i thought ishould go and stay there again next summer.she meant to be impertinently curious just as such an anne coxshould be.she said he was very agreeable the day he dined there.
he satby her at dinner.
miss nash thinks either of the coxes wouldbe very glad to marry him.very likely.i think they are without exception the most vulgargirls in highbury.harriet had business at fords.emma thought it most prudent to gowith her.
another accidental meeting with the martins was possibleand in her present state would be dangerous.harriet tempted by every thing and swayed by half a word was alwaysvery long at a purchase and while she was still hanging over muslinsand changing her mind emma went to the door for amusement.much couldnot be hoped from the traffic of even the busiest part of highburymr.
perry walking hastily by mr. william cox letting himself in atthe officedoor mr. coles carriagehorses returning from exerciseor a stray letterboy on an obstinate mule were the liveliestobjects she could presume to expect and when her eyes fell only onthe butcher with his tray a tidy old woman travelling homewards fromshop with her full basket two curs quarrelling over a dirty boneand a string of dawdling children round the bakers little bowwindoweyeing the gingerbread she knew she had no reason to complainand was amused enough quite enough still to stand at the door.a mind lively and at ease can do with seeing nothing and can seenothing that does not answer.she looked down the randalls road.
the scene enlargedtwo persons appeared mrs. weston and her soninlaw they werewalking into highburyto hartfield of course.
they were stoppinghowever in the first place at mrs. batess whose house wasa little nearer randalls than fords and had all but knockedwhen emma caught their eye.immediately they crossed the roadand came forward to her and the agreeableness of yesterdaysengagement seemed to give fresh pleasure to the present meeting.mrs.
weston informed her that she was going to call on the batesesin order to hear the new instrument.for my companion tells me said she that i absolutely promisedmiss bates last night that i would come this morning.
i wasnot aware of it myself.
i did not know that i had fixed a daybut as he says i did i am going now.and while mrs. weston pays her visit i may be allowed i hopesaid frank churchill to join your party and wait for her at hartfieldif you are going home.mrs.
weston was disappointed.i thought you meant to go with me.
they would be very much pleased.me  i should be quite in the way.
but perhapsi may be equallyin the way here.
miss woodhouse looks as if she did not want me.my aunt always sends me off when she is shopping.
she says i fidgether to death and miss woodhouse looks as if she could almost saythe same.
what am i to doi am here on no business of my own said emma i am only waitingfor my friend.
she will probably have soon done and then weshall go home.
but you had better go with mrs. weston and hearthe instrument.wellif you advise it.but with a smile if colonel campbellshould have employed a careless friend and if it should proveto have an indifferent tonewhat shall i say  i shall be nosupport to mrs. weston.
she might do very well by herself.a disagreeable truth would be palatable through her lips but iam the wretchedest being in the world at a civil falsehood.i do not believe any such thing replied emma.i am persuadedthat you can be as insincere as your neighbours when it is necessarybut there is no reason to suppose the instrument is indifferent.quite otherwise indeed if i understood miss fairfaxs opinionlast night.do come with me said mrs. weston if it be not very disagreeableto you.
it need not detain us long.
we will go to hartfield afterwards.we will follow them to hartfield.
i really wish you to call with me.it will be felt so great an attention and i always thought youmeant it.he could say no more and with the hope of hartfield to reward himreturned with mrs. weston to mrs. batess door.
emma watched them inand then joined harriet at the interesting countertrying with allthe force of her own mind to convince her that if she wanted plainmuslin it was of no use to look at figured and that a blue ribbonbe it ever so beautiful would still never match her yellow pattern.at last it was all settled even to the destination of the parcel.should i send it to mrs. goddards maam asked mrs. ford.yesnoyes to mrs. goddards.
only my pattern gown isat hartfield.
no you shall send it to hartfield if you please.but then mrs. goddard will want to see it.and i could take thepattern gown home any day.
but i shall want the ribbon directlyso it had better go to hartfieldat least the ribbon.
you couldmake it into two parcels mrs. ford could not youit is not worth while harriet to give mrs. ford the troubleof two parcels.no more it is.no trouble in the world maam said the obliging mrs. ford.oh but indeed i would much rather have it only in one.then if you please you shall send it all to mrs. goddardsi do not knowno i think miss woodhouse i may just as wellhave it sent to hartfield and take it home with me at night.what do you advisethat you do not give another halfsecond to the subject.to hartfield if you please mrs. ford.aye that will be much best said harriet quite satisfiedi should not at all like to have it sent to mrs. goddards.voices approached the shopor rather one voice and two ladiesmrs.
weston and miss bates met them at the door.my dear miss woodhouse said the latter i am just run across toentreat the favour of you to come and sit down with us a little whileand give us your opinion of our new instrument you and miss smith.how do you do miss smithvery well i thank you.and i beggedmrs.
weston to come with me that i might be sure of succeeding.i hope mrs. bates and miss fairfax arevery well i am much obliged to you.
my mother is delightfully welland jane caught no cold last night.
how is mr. woodhousei am so gladto hear such a good account.
mrs. weston told me you were here.oh then said i i must run across i am sure miss woodhouse willallow me just to run across and entreat her to come in my motherwill be so very happy to see herand now we are such a nice partyshe cannot refuse.aye pray do said mr. frank churchillmiss woodhouses opinion of the instrument will be worth having.but said i i shall be more sure of succeeding if one of you will gowith me.oh said he wait half a minute till i have finishedmy jobfor would you believe it miss woodhouse there he isin the most obliging manner in the world fastening in the rivet of mymothers spectacles.the rivet came out you know this morning.so very obligingfor my mother had no use of her spectaclescould not put them on.
and by the bye every body ought to havetwo pair of spectacles they should indeed.
jane said so.i meant to take them over to john saunders the first thing i didbut something or other hindered me all the morning first one thingthen another there is no saying what you know.
at one time patty cameto say she thought the kitchen chimney wanted sweeping.
oh said ipatty do not come with your bad news to me.
here is the rivetof your mistresss spectacles out.
then the baked apples came homemrs.
wallis sent them by her boy they are extremely civil andobliging to us the wallises alwaysi have heard some peoplesay that mrs. wallis can be uncivil and give a very rude answerbut we have never known any thing but the greatest attentionfrom them.
and it cannot be for the value of our custom nowfor what is our consumption of bread you know  only three of us.besides dear jane at presentand she really eats nothingmakes sucha shocking breakfast you would be quite frightened if you saw it.i dare not let my mother know how little she eatsso i say onething and then i say another and it passes off.
but about themiddle of the day she gets hungry and there is nothing she likesso well as these baked apples and they are extremely wholesomefor i took the opportunity the other day of asking mr. perryi happened to meet him in the street.
not that i had any doubt beforei have so often heard mr. woodhouse recommend a baked apple.i believe it is the only way that mr. woodhouse thinks thefruit thoroughly wholesome.
we have appledumplings howeververy often.
patty makes an excellent appledumpling.
wellmrs.
weston you have prevailed i hope and these ladies willoblige us.emma would be very happy to wait on mrs. bates c. and theydid at last move out of the shop with no farther delay from missbates thanhow do you do mrs. ford  i beg your pardon.
i did not seeyou before.
i hear you have a charming collection of new ribbonsfrom town.
jane came back delighted yesterday.
thank yethe gloves do very wellonly a little too large about the wristbut jane is taking them in.what was i talking of said she beginning again when they wereall in the street.emma wondered on what of all the medley she would fix.i declare i cannot recollect what i was talking of.oh mymothers spectacles.
so very obliging of mr. frank churchilloh said he i do think i can fasten the rivet i like a jobof this kind excessively.which you know shewed him to be sovery.
.
.
.
indeed i must say that much as i had heard of himbefore and much as i had expected he very far exceeds anything.
.
.
.
i do congratulate you mrs. weston most warmly.he seems every thing the fondest parent could.
.
.
.
oh said hei can fasten the rivet.
i like a job of that sort excessively.i never shall forget his manner.
and when i brought out the bakedapples from the closet and hoped our friends would be so veryobliging as to take some oh said he directly there is nothingin the way of fruit half so good and these are the finestlookinghomebaked apples i ever saw in my life.
that you know was sovery.
.
.
.
and i am sure by his manner it was no compliment.indeed they are very delightful apples and mrs. wallis does themfull justiceonly we do not have them baked more than twiceand mr. woodhouse made us promise to have them done three timesbut miss woodhouse will be so good as not to mention it.
the applesthemselves are the very finest sort for baking beyond a doubtall from donwellsome of mr. knightleys most liberal supply.he sends us a sack every year and certainly there never was sucha keeping apple anywhere as one of his treesi believe thereis two of them.
my mother says the orchard was always famousin her younger days.
but i was really quite shocked the other dayfor mr. knightley called one morning and jane was eating these applesand we talked about them and said how much she enjoyed themand he asked whether we were not got to the end of our stock.i am sure you must be said he and i will send youanother supply for i have a great many more than i can ever use.william larkins let me keep a larger quantity than usual this year.i will send you some more before they get good for nothing.so i begged he would notfor really as to ours being gone i couldnot absolutely say that we had a great many leftit was but halfa dozen indeed but they should be all kept for jane and i couldnot at all bear that he should be sending us more so liberal as hehad been already and jane said the same.
and when he was goneshe almost quarrelled with meno i should not say quarrelledfor we never had a quarrel in our lives but she was quite distressedthat i had owned the apples were so nearly gone she wished i hadmade him believe we had a great many left.
oh said i my deari did say as much as i could.
however the very same eveningwilliam larkins came over with a large basket of apples the samesort of apples a bushel at least and i was very much obligedand went down and spoke to william larkins and said every thingas you may suppose.
william larkins is such an old acquaintancei am always glad to see him.
but however i found afterwardsfrom patty that william said it was all the apples of that sorthis master had he had brought them alland now his master had notone left to bake or boil.
william did not seem to mind it himselfhe was so pleased to think his master had sold so many for williamyou know thinks more of his masters profit than any thingbut mrs. hodges he said was quite displeased at their beingall sent away.
she could not bear that her master should not beable to have another appletart this spring.
he told patty thisbut bid her not mind it and be sure not to say any thing to usabout it for mrs. hodges would be cross sometimes and as long asso many sacks were sold it did not signify who ate the remainder.and so patty told me and i was excessively shocked indeedi would not have mr. knightley know any thing about it forthe world  he would be so very.
.
.
.
i wanted to keep it fromjanes knowledge but unluckily i had mentioned it before i wasaware.miss bates had just done as patty opened the door and her visitorswalked upstairs without having any regular narration to attend topursued only by the sounds of her desultory goodwill.pray take care mrs. weston there is a step at the turning.pray take care miss woodhouse ours is rather a dark staircaserather darker and narrower than one could wish.
miss smithpray take care.
miss woodhouse i am quite concerned i am sure youhit your foot.
miss smith the step at the turning.chapter xthe appearance of the little sittingroom as they enteredwas tranquillity itself mrs. bates deprived of her usual employmentslumbering on one side of the fire frank churchill at a tablenear her most deedily occupied about her spectacles and jane fairfaxstanding with her back to them intent on her pianoforte.busy as he was however the young man was yet able to shew a mosthappy countenance on seeing emma again.this is a pleasure said he in rather a low voice coming atleast ten minutes earlier than i had calculated.
you find metrying to be useful tell me if you think i shall succeed.what said mrs. weston have not you finished it yet you wouldnot earn a very good livelihood as a working silversmith at this rate.i have not been working uninterruptedly he replied i have beenassisting miss fairfax in trying to make her instrument stand steadilyit was not quite firm an unevenness in the floor i believe.you see we have been wedging one leg with paper.
this was very kindof you to be persuaded to come.
i was almost afraid you would behurrying home.he contrived that she should be seated by him and was sufficientlyemployed in looking out the best baked apple for her and tryingto make her help or advise him in his work till jane fairfax wasquite ready to sit down to the pianoforte again.
that she was notimmediately ready emma did suspect to arise from the state of her nervesshe had not yet possessed the instrument long enough to touch itwithout emotion she must reason herself into the power of performanceand emma could not but pity such feelings whatever their originand could not but resolve never to expose them to her neighbour again.at last jane began and though the first bars were feebly giventhe powers of the instrument were gradually done full justice to.mrs.
weston had been delighted before and was delighted againemma joined her in all her praise and the pianoforte with everyproper discrimination was pronounced to be altogether of thehighest promise.whoever colonel campbell might employ said frank churchillwith a smile at emma the person has not chosen ill.  i heard a gooddeal of colonel campbells taste at weymouth and the softness of theupper notes i am sure is exactly what he and all that party wouldparticularly prize.
i dare say miss fairfax that he either gavehis friend very minute directions or wrote to broadwood himself.do not you think sojane did not look round.
she was not obliged to hear.
mrs. westonhad been speaking to her at the same moment.it is not fair said emma in a whisper mine was a random guess.do not distress her.he shook his head with a smile and looked as if he had very littledoubt and very little mercy.
soon afterwards he began againhow much your friends in ireland must be enjoying your pleasureon this occasion miss fairfax.
i dare say they often think of youand wonder which will be the day the precise day of the instrumentscoming to hand.
do you imagine colonel campbell knows the businessto be going forward just at this timedo you imagine it to bethe consequence of an immediate commission from him or that he mayhave sent only a general direction an order indefinite as to timeto depend upon contingencies and convenienceshe paused.
she could not but hear she could not avoid answeringtill i have a letter from colonel campbell said she in a voiceof forced calmness i can imagine nothing with any confidence.it must be all conjecture.conjectureaye sometimes one conjectures right and sometimesone conjectures wrong.
i wish i could conjecture how soon i shallmake this rivet quite firm.
what nonsense one talks miss woodhousewhen hard at work if one talks at allyour real workmeni suppose hold their tongues but we gentlemen labourers if we gethold of a wordmiss fairfax said something about conjecturing.there it is done.
i have the pleasure madam to mrs. batesof restoring your spectacles healed for the present.he was very warmly thanked both by mother and daughter to escapea little from the latter he went to the pianoforte and beggedmiss fairfax who was still sitting at it to play something more.if you are very kind said he it will be one of the waltzeswe danced last nightlet me live them over again.
you did notenjoy them as i did you appeared tired the whole time.
i believeyou were glad we danced no longer but i would have given worldsall the worlds one ever has to givefor another halfhour.she played.what felicity it is to hear a tune again which has made one happyif i mistake not that was danced at weymouth.she looked up at him for a moment coloured deeply and playedsomething else.
he took some music from a chair near the pianoforteand turning to emma saidhere is something quite new to me.
do you know itcramer.and here are a new set of irish melodies.
that from such a quarterone might expect.
this was all sent with the instrument.
very thoughtfulof colonel campbell was not ithe knew miss fairfax could haveno music here.
i honour that part of the attention particularlyit shews it to have been so thoroughly from the heart.
nothing hastilydone nothing incomplete.
true affection only could have prompted it.emma wished he would be less pointed yet could not help being amusedand when on glancing her eye towards jane fairfax she caughtthe remains of a smile when she saw that with all the deep blushof consciousness there had been a smile of secret delightshe had less scruple in the amusement and much less compunctionwith respect to her.this amiable upright perfect jane fairfaxwas apparently cherishing very reprehensible feelings.he brought all the music to her and they looked it over together.emma took the opportunity of whisperingyou speak too plain.
she must understand you.i hope she does.
i would have her understand me.
i am notin the least ashamed of my meaning.but really i am half ashamed and wish i had never taken upthe idea.i am very glad you did and that you communicated it to me.i have now a key to all her odd looks and ways.
leave shame to her.if she does wrong she ought to feel it.she is not entirely without it i think.i do not see much sign of it.
she is playing robin adairat this momenthis favourite.shortly afterwards miss bates passing near the windowdescried mr. knightley on horseback not far off.mr.
knightley i declarei must speak to him if possiblejust to thank him.
i will not open the window here it would giveyou all cold but i can go into my mothers room you know.
i daresay he will come in when he knows who is here.
quite delightfulto have you all meet soour little room so honouredshe was in the adjoining chamber while she still spoke and openingthe casement there immediately called mr. knightleys attentionand every syllable of their conversation was as distinctly heardby the others as if it had passed within the same apartment.how d ye dohow dye dovery well i thank you.
so obligedto you for the carriage last night.
we were just in timemy mother just ready for us.
pray come in do come in.
you willfind some friends here.so began miss bates and mr. knightley seemed determined to be heardin his turn for most resolutely and commandingly did he sayhow is your niece miss batesi want to inquire after you allbut particularly your niece.
how is miss fairfaxi hope shecaught no cold last night.
how is she today tell me how missfairfax is.and miss bates was obliged to give a direct answer before hewould hear her in any thing else.
the listeners were amusedand mrs. weston gave emma a look of particular meaning.
but emmastill shook her head in steady scepticism.so obliged to youso very much obliged to you for the carriageresumed miss bates.he cut her short withi am going to kingston.
can i do any thing for youoh dear kingstonare youmrs.
cole was saying the other dayshe wanted something from kingston.mrs.
cole has servants to send.
can i do any thing for youno i thank you.
but do come in.
who do you think is heremiss woodhouse and miss smith so kind as to call to hear thenew pianoforte.
do put up your horse at the crown and come in.well said he in a deliberating manner for five minutes perhaps.and here is mrs. weston and mr. frank churchill tooquite delightfulso many friendsno not now i thank you.
i could not stay two minutes.i must get on to kingston as fast as i can.oh do come in.
they will be so very happy to see you.no no your room is full enough.
i will call another dayand hear the pianoforte.well i am so sorryoh  mr. knightley what a delightful partylast night how extremely pleasant.did you ever see such dancingwas not it delightfulmiss woodhouse and mr. frank churchilli never saw any thing equal to it.oh very delightful indeed i can say nothing less for i supposemiss woodhouse and mr. frank churchill are hearing every thingthat passes.
and raising his voice still more i do not see why missfairfax should not be mentioned too.
i think miss fairfax dancesvery well and mrs. weston is the very best countrydance playerwithout exception in england.
now if your friends have any gratitudethey will say something pretty loud about you and me in returnbut i cannot stay to hear it.oh  mr. knightley one moment more something of consequenceso shockedjane and i are both so shocked about the appleswhat is the matter nowto think of your sending us all your store apples.
you said you hada great many and now you have not one left.
we really are so shockedmrs.
hodges may well be angry.
william larkins mentioned it here.you should not have done it indeed you should not.
ah he is off.he never can bear to be thanked.
but i thought he would have staid nowand it would have been a pity not to have mentioned.
.
.
.
wellreturning to the room i have not been able to succeed.mr.
knightley cannot stop.
he is going to kingston.
he asked meif he could do any thing.
.
.
.yes said jane we heard his kind offers we heard every thing.oh yes my dear i dare say you might because you know the doorwas open and the window was open and mr. knightley spoke loud.you must have heard every thing to be sure.
can i do any thingfor you at kingston said he so i just mentioned.
.
.
.
ohmiss woodhouse must you be goingyou seem but just comeso veryobliging of you.emma found it really time to be at home the visit had alreadylasted long and on examining watches so much of the morning wasperceived to be gone that mrs. weston and her companion takingleave also could allow themselves only to walk with the two youngladies to hartfield gates before they set off for randalls.chapter xiit may be possible to do without dancing entirely.
instances havebeen known of young people passing many many months successivelywithout being at any ball of any description and no material injuryaccrue either to body or mindbut when a beginning is madewhen the felicities of rapid motion have once been though slightlyfeltit must be a very heavy set that does not ask for more.frank churchill had danced once at highbury and longed to dance againand the last halfhour of an evening which mr. woodhouse was persuadedto spend with his daughter at randalls was passed by the two youngpeople in schemes on the subject.
franks was the first ideaand his the greatest zeal in pursuing it for the lady was the bestjudge of the difficulties and the most solicitous for accommodationand appearance.
but still she had inclination enough for shewingpeople again how delightfully mr. frank churchill and misswoodhouse dancedfor doing that in which she need not blush to compareherself with jane fairfaxand even for simple dancing itselfwithout any of the wicked aids of vanityto assist him firstin pacing out the room they were in to see what it could be madeto holdand then in taking the dimensions of the other parlourin the hope of discovering in spite of all that mr. weston couldsay of their exactly equal size that it was a little the largest.his first proposition and request that the dance begun at mr. colesshould be finished therethat the same party should be collectedand the same musician engaged met with the readiest acquiescence.mr.
weston entered into the idea with thorough enjoymentand mrs. weston most willingly undertook to play as long as theycould wish to dance and the interesting employment had followedof reckoning up exactly who there would be and portioning out theindispensable division of space to every couple.you and miss smith and miss fairfax will be three and the twomiss coxes five had been repeated many times over.
and therewill be the two gilberts young cox my father and myselfbesides mr. knightley.
yes that will be quite enough for pleasure.you and miss smith and miss fairfax will be three and the two misscoxes five and for five couple there will be plenty of room.but soon it came to be on one sidebut will there be good room for five couplei really do not thinkthere will.on anotherand after all five couple are not enough to make it worthwhile to stand up.
five couple are nothing when one thinksseriously about it.
it will not do to invite five couple.it can be allowable only as the thought of the moment.somebody said that miss gilbert was expected at her brothersand must be invited with the rest.
somebody else believedmrs.
gilbert would have danced the other evening if she hadbeen asked.
a word was put in for a second young cox and at lastmr.
weston naming one family of cousins who must be includedand another of very old acquaintance who could not be left outit became a certainty that the five couple would be at least tenand a very interesting speculation in what possible manner theycould be disposed of.the doors of the two rooms were just opposite each other.might not they use both rooms and dance across the passageit seemed the best scheme and yet it was not so good but thatmany of them wanted a better.
emma said it would be awkwardmrs.
weston was in distress about the supper and mr. woodhouseopposed it earnestly on the score of health.
it made him sovery unhappy indeed that it could not be persevered in.oh no said he it would be the extreme of imprudence.i could not bear it for emmaemma is not strong.
she wouldcatch a dreadful cold.
so would poor little harriet.so you would all.
mrs. weston you would be quite laid updo not let them talk of such a wild thing.
pray do not let themtalk of it.
that young man speaking lower is very thoughtless.do not tell his father but that young man is not quite the thing.he has been opening the doors very often this evening and keepingthem open very inconsiderately.
he does not think of the draught.i do not mean to set you against him but indeed he is not quitethe thingmrs.
weston was sorry for such a charge.
she knew the importanceof it and said every thing in her power to do it away.
every doorwas now closed the passage plan given up and the first schemeof dancing only in the room they were in resorted to againand with such goodwill on frank churchills part that the spacewhich a quarter of an hour before had been deemed barely sufficientfor five couple was now endeavoured to be made out quite enoughfor ten.we were too magnificent said he.
we allowed unnecessary room.ten couple may stand here very well.emma demurred.
it would be a crowda sad crowd and what couldbe worse than dancing without space to turn invery true he gravely replied it was very bad.
but still hewent on measuring and still he ended withi think there will be very tolerable room for ten couple.no no said she you are quite unreasonable.
it would be dreadfulto be standing so close  nothing can be farther from pleasurethan to be dancing in a crowdand a crowd in a little roomthere is no denying it he replied.
i agree with you exactly.a crowd in a little roommiss woodhouse you have the art of givingpictures in a few words.
exquisite quite exquisitestill howeverhaving proceeded so far one is unwilling to give the matter up.it would be a disappointment to my fatherand altogetheri donot know thati am rather of opinion that ten couple might standhere very well.emma perceived that the nature of his gallantry was a littleselfwilled and that he would rather oppose than lose the pleasureof dancing with her but she took the compliment and forgavethe rest.
had she intended ever to marry him it might have beenworth while to pause and consider and try to understand the valueof his preference and the character of his temper but forall the purposes of their acquaintance he was quite amiable enough.before the middle of the next day he was at hartfield and he enteredthe room with such an agreeable smile as certified the continuanceof the scheme.
it soon appeared that he came to announce an improvement.well miss woodhouse he almost immediately began your inclinationfor dancing has not been quite frightened away i hope by theterrors of my fathers little rooms.
i bring a new proposalon the subjecta thought of my fathers which waits only yourapprobation to be acted upon.
may i hope for the honour of yourhand for the two first dances of this little projected ballto be given not at randalls but at the crown innthe crownyes if you and mr. woodhouse see no objection and i trust you cannotmy father hopes his friends will be so kind as to visit him there.better accommodations he can promise them and not a less gratefulwelcome than at randalls.
it is his own idea.
mrs. weston seesno objection to it provided you are satisfied.
this is what weall feel.
oh you were perfectly right  ten couple in either ofthe randalls rooms would have been insufferabledreadfuli felthow right you were the whole time but was too anxious for securingany thing to like to yield.
is not it a good exchangeyou consenti hope you consentit appears to me a plan that nobody can object to if mr. andmrs.
weston do not.
i think it admirable and as far as i cananswer for myself shall be most happyit seems the only improvementthat could be.
papa do you not think it an excellent improvementshe was obliged to repeat and explain it before it was fullycomprehended and then being quite new farther representationswere necessary to make it acceptable.no he thought it very far from an improvementa very bad planmuch worse than the other.
a room at an inn was always dampand dangerous never properly aired or fit to be inhabited.if they must dance they had better dance at randalls.
he had neverbeen in the room at the crown in his lifedid not know the peoplewho kept it by sight.oh noa very bad plan.
they would catchworse colds at the crown than anywhere.i was going to observe sir said frank churchillthat one of the great recommendations of this change wouldbe the very little danger of any bodys catching coldso much less danger at the crown than at randalls  mr. perrymight have reason to regret the alteration but nobody else could.sir said mr. woodhouse rather warmly you are very muchmistaken if you suppose mr. perry to be that sort of character.mr.
perry is extremely concerned when any of us are ill.  but ido not understand how the room at the crown can be safer for youthan your fathers house.from the very circumstance of its being larger sir.
we shall haveno occasion to open the windows at allnot once the whole eveningand it is that dreadful habit of opening the windows letting in coldair upon heated bodies which as you well know sir does the mischief.open the windowsbut surely mr. churchill nobody would thinkof opening the windows at randalls.
nobody could be so imprudenti never heard of such a thing.
dancing with open windowsi am sureneither your father nor mrs. weston poor miss taylor that waswould suffer it.ah sirbut a thoughtless young person will sometimes step behinda windowcurtain and throw up a sash without its being suspected.i have often known it done myself.have you indeed sirbless me  i never could have supposed it.but i live out of the world and am often astonished at what i hear.however this does make a difference and perhaps when we cometo talk it overbut these sort of things require a good dealof consideration.
one cannot resolve upon them in a hurry.if mr. and mrs. weston will be so obliging as to call here one morningwe may talk it over and see what can be done.but unfortunately sir my time is so limitedoh interrupted emma there will be plenty of time for talkingevery thing over.
there is no hurry at all.
if it can be contrivedto be at the crown papa it will be very convenient for the horses.they will be so near their own stable.so they will my dear.
that is a great thing.
not that jamesever complains but it is right to spare our horses when we can.if i could be sure of the rooms being thoroughly airedbut ismrs.
stokes to be trusted  i doubt it.
i do not know hereven by sight.i can answer for every thing of that nature sir because it willbe under mrs. westons care.
mrs. weston undertakes to directthe whole.there papanow you must be satisfiedour own dear mrs. westonwho is carefulness itself.
do not you remember what mr. perry saidso many years ago when i had the measles  if miss taylor undertakesto wrap miss emma up you need not have any fears sir.
how oftenhave i heard you speak of it as such a compliment to heraye very true.
mr. perry did say so.
i shall never forget it.poor little emma  you were very bad with the measles that isyou would have been very bad but for perrys great attention.he came four times a day for a week.
he said from the firstit was a very good sortwhich was our great comfort but the measlesare a dreadful complaint.
i hope whenever poor isabellas little oneshave the measles she will send for perry.my father and mrs. weston are at the crown at this momentsaid frank churchill examining the capabilities of the house.i left them there and came on to hartfield impatient for your opinionand hoping you might be persuaded to join them and give your adviceon the spot.
i was desired to say so from both.
it would be thegreatest pleasure to them if you could allow me to attend you there.they can do nothing satisfactorily without you.emma was most happy to be called to such a council and her fatherengaging to think it all over while she was gone the two youngpeople set off together without delay for the crown.
there weremr.
and mrs. weston delighted to see her and receive her approbationvery busy and very happy in their different way she in somelittle distress and he finding every thing perfect.emma said she this paper is worse than i expected.look in places you see it is dreadfully dirty and the wainscotis more yellow and forlorn than any thing i could have imagined.my dear you are too particular said her husband.
what doesall that signify  you will see nothing of it by candlelight.it will be as clean as randalls by candlelight.
we never see anything of it on our clubnights.the ladies here probably exchanged looks which meant men neverknow when things are dirty or not and the gentlemen perhapsthought each to himself women will have their little nonsensesand needless cares.one perplexity however arose which the gentlemen did not disdain.it regarded a supperroom.
at the time of the ballrooms being builtsuppers had not been in question and a small cardroom adjoiningwas the only addition.
what was to be done  this cardroom wouldbe wanted as a cardroom now or if cards were conveniently votedunnecessary by their four selves still was it not too small forany comfortable supper  another room of much better size might besecured for the purpose but it was at the other end of the houseand a long awkward passage must be gone through to get at it.this made a difficulty.
mrs. weston was afraid of draughtsfor the young people in that passage and neither emma nor thegentlemen could tolerate the prospect of being miserably crowdedat supper.mrs.
weston proposed having no regular supper merely sandwichesc.
set out in the little room but that was scouted as awretched suggestion.
a private dance without sitting down to supperwas pronounced an infamous fraud upon the rights of men and womenand mrs. weston must not speak of it again.
she then took anotherline of expediency and looking into the doubtful room observedi do not think it is so very small.
we shall not be manyyou know.and mr. weston at the same time walking briskly with long stepsthrough the passage was calling outyou talk a great deal of the length of this passage my dear.it is a mere nothing after all and not the least draught fromthe stairs.i wish said mrs. weston one could know which arrangement ourguests in general would like best.
to do what would be most generallypleasing must be our objectif one could but tell what that would be.yes very true cried frank very true.
you want your neighboursopinions.
i do not wonder at you.
if one could ascertain what thechief of themthe coles for instance.
they are not far off.shall i call upon them  or miss bates  she is still nearer.and i do not know whether miss bates is not as likely to understandthe inclinations of the rest of the people as any body.
i thinkwe do want a larger council.
suppose i go and invite miss batesto join uswellif you please said mrs. weston rather hesitating if youthink she will be of any use.you will get nothing to the purpose from miss bates said emma.she will be all delight and gratitude but she will tell you nothing.she will not even listen to your questions.
i see no advantage inconsulting miss bates.but she is so amusing so extremely amusing  i am very fondof hearing miss bates talk.
and i need not bring the whole familyyou know.here mr. weston joined them and on hearing what was proposedgave it his decided approbation.aye do frank.go and fetch miss bates and let us end the matterat once.
she will enjoy the scheme i am sure and i do not knowa properer person for shewing us how to do away difficulties.fetch miss bates.
we are growing a little too nice.
she isa standing lesson of how to be happy.
but fetch them both.invite them both.both sir  can the old lady .
.
.the old lady  no the young lady to be sure.
i shall think youa great blockhead frank if you bring the aunt without the niece.oh  i beg your pardon sir.
i did not immediately recollect.undoubtedly if you wish it i will endeavour to persuade them both.and away he ran.long before he reappeared attending the short neat briskmoving auntand her elegant niecemrs.
weston like a sweettemperedwoman and a good wife had examined the passage againand found the evils of it much less than she had supposed beforeindeed very trifling and here ended the difficulties of decision.all the rest in speculation at least was perfectly smooth.all the minor arrangements of table and chair lights and musictea and supper made themselves or were left as mere triflesto be settled at any time between mrs. weston and mrs. stokes.every body invited was certainly to come frank had already writtento enscombe to propose staying a few days beyond his fortnightwhich could not possibly be refused.
and a delightful dance it wasto be.most cordially when miss bates arrived did she agree that it must.as a counsellor she was not wanted but as an approver a muchsafer character she was truly welcome.
her approbation at oncegeneral and minute warm and incessant could not but pleaseand for another halfhour they were all walking to and frobetween the different rooms some suggesting some attendingand all in happy enjoyment of the future.
the party did not breakup without emmas being positively secured for the two first dancesby the hero of the evening nor without her overhearing mr. westonwhisper to his wife he has asked her my dear.
thats right.i knew he wouldchapter xiione thing only was wanting to make the prospect of the ballcompletely satisfactory to emmaits being fixed for a day withinthe granted term of frank churchills stay in surry for in spiteof mr. westons confidence she could not think it so very impossiblethat the churchills might not allow their nephew to remaina day beyond his fortnight.
but this was not judged feasible.the preparations must take their time nothing could be properlyready till the third week were entered on and for a few days theymust be planning proceeding and hoping in uncertaintyat the riskin her opinion the great risk of its being all in vain.enscombe however was gracious gracious in fact if not in word.his wish of staying longer evidently did not please but it wasnot opposed.
all was safe and prosperous and as the removal of onesolicitude generally makes way for another emma being now certainof her ball began to adopt as the next vexation mr. knightleysprovoking indifference about it.
either because he did notdance himself or because the plan had been formed without hisbeing consulted he seemed resolved that it should not interest himdetermined against its exciting any present curiosity or affordinghim any future amusement.
to her voluntary communications emmacould get no more approving reply thanvery well.
if the westons think it worth while to be at all thistrouble for a few hours of noisy entertainment i have nothingto say against it but that they shall not chuse pleasures for me.oh yes i must be there i could not refuse and i will keepas much awake as i can but i would rather be at home looking overwilliam larkinss weeks account much rather i confess.pleasure in seeing dancingnot i indeedi never look at iti do not know who does.fine dancing i believe like virtuemust be its own reward.
those who are standing by are usuallythinking of something very different.this emma felt was aimed at her and it made her quite angry.it was not in compliment to jane fairfax however that he wasso indifferent or so indignant he was not guided by her feelingsin reprobating the ball for she enjoyed the thought of itto an extraordinary degree.
it made her animatedopen heartedshe voluntarily saidoh  miss woodhouse i hope nothing may happen to prevent the ball.what a disappointment it would be  i do look forward to it i ownwith very great pleasure.it was not to oblige jane fairfax therefore that he would havepreferred the society of william larkins.
noshe was more and moreconvinced that mrs. weston was quite mistaken in that surmise.there was a great deal of friendly and of compassionate attachmenton his sidebut no love.alas there was soon no leisure for quarrelling with mr. knightley.two days of joyful security were immediately followed by theoverthrow of every thing.
a letter arrived from mr. churchillto urge his nephews instant return.
mrs. churchill was unwellfar too unwell to do without him she had been in a very sufferingstate so said her husband when writing to her nephew two days beforethough from her usual unwillingness to give pain and constanthabit of never thinking of herself she had not mentioned itbut now she was too ill to trifle and must entreat him to set offfor enscombe without delay.the substance of this letter was forwarded to emma in a notefrom mrs. weston instantly.
as to his going it was inevitable.he must be gone within a few hours though without feeling any realalarm for his aunt to lessen his repugnance.
he knew her illnessesthey never occurred but for her own convenience.mrs.
weston added that he could only allow himself time tohurry to highbury after breakfast and take leave of the fewfriends there whom he could suppose to feel any interest in himand that he might be expected at hartfield very soon.this wretched note was the finale of emmas breakfast.
when onceit had been read there was no doing any thing but lamentand exclaim.
the loss of the ballthe loss of the young manand all that the young man might be feelingit was too wretchedsuch a delightful evening as it would have beenevery body so happyand she and her partner the happiesti said it would be sowas the only consolation.her fathers feelings were quite distinct.
he thought principallyof mrs. churchills illness and wanted to know how she was treatedand as for the ball it was shocking to have dear emma disappointedbut they would all be safer at home.emma was ready for her visitor some time before he appearedbut if this reflected at all upon his impatience his sorrowfullook and total want of spirits when he did come might redeem him.he felt the going away almost too much to speak of it.
his dejectionwas most evident.
he sat really lost in thought for the firstfew minutes and when rousing himself it was only to sayof all horrid things leavetaking is the worst.but you will come again said emma.
this will not be your onlyvisit to randalls.ahshaking his headthe uncertainty of when i may be ableto returni shall try for it with a zealit will be the objectof all my thoughts and caresand if my uncle and aunt go to townthis springbut i am afraidthey did not stir last springi am afraid it is a custom gone for ever.our poor ball must be quite given up.ah that ballwhy did we wait for any thingwhy not seize thepleasure at oncehow often is happiness destroyed by preparationfoolish preparationyou told us it would be so.oh  miss woodhousewhy are you always so rightindeed i am very sorry to be right in this instance.
i wouldmuch rather have been merry than wise.if i can come again we are still to have our ball.
my fatherdepends on it.
do not forget your engagement.emma looked graciously.such a fortnight as it has been he continued every day moreprecious and more delightful than the day beforeevery day makingme less fit to bear any other place.
happy those who can remainat highburyas you do us such ample justice now said emma laughing i willventure to ask whether you did not come a little doubtfully at firstdo not we rather surpass your expectations  i am sure we do.i am sure you did not much expect to like us.
you would not have beenso long in coming if you had had a pleasant idea of highbury.he laughed rather consciously and though denying the sentimentemma was convinced that it had been so.and you must be off this very morningyes my father is to join me here  we shall walk back togetherand i must be off immediately.
i am almost afraid that every momentwill bring him.not five minutes to spare even for your friends miss fairfax andmiss bates  how unlucky  miss batess powerful argumentative mindmight have strengthened yours.yesi have called there passing the door i thought it better.it was a right thing to do.
i went in for three minutes and wasdetained by miss batess being absent.
she was out and i felt itimpossible not to wait till she came in.
she is a woman that one maythat one must laugh at but that one would not wish to slight.it was better to pay my visit thenhe hesitated got up walked to a window.in short said he perhaps miss woodhousei think you canhardly be quite without suspicionhe looked at her as if wanting to read her thoughts.
she hardlyknew what to say.
it seemed like the forerunner of somethingabsolutely serious which she did not wish.
forcing herselfto speak therefore in the hope of putting it by she calmly saidyou are quite in the right it was most natural to pay your visit thenhe was silent.
she believed he was looking at her probably reflectingon what she had said and trying to understand the manner.she heard him sigh.
it was natural for him to feel that he hadcause to sigh.
he could not believe her to be encouraging him.a few awkward moments passed and he sat down again and in a moredetermined manner saidit was something to feel that all the rest of my time might begiven to hartfield.
my regard for hartfield is most warmhe stopt again rose again and seemed quite embarrassed.he was more in love with her than emma had supposed and who can sayhow it might have ended if his father had not made his appearancemr.
woodhouse soon followed and the necessity of exertion madehim composed.a very few minutes more however completed the present trial.mr.
weston always alert when business was to be done and asincapable of procrastinating any evil that was inevitableas of foreseeing any that was doubtful said it was time to goand the young man though he might and did sigh could not but agreeto take leave.i shall hear about you all said he that is my chief consolation.i shall hear of every thing that is going on among you.
i haveengaged mrs. weston to correspond with me.
she has been so kind asto promise it.
oh the blessing of a female correspondent when oneis really interested in the absentshe will tell me every thing.in her letters i shall be at dear highbury again.a very friendly shake of the hand a very earnest goodbyeclosed the speech and the door had soon shut out frank churchill.short had been the noticeshort their meeting he was gone and emmafelt so sorry to part and foresaw so great a loss to their littlesociety from his absence as to begin to be afraid of being too sorryand feeling it too much.it was a sad change.
they had been meeting almost every daysince his arrival.
certainly his being at randalls had givengreat spirit to the last two weeksindescribable spirit the ideathe expectation of seeing him which every morning had broughtthe assurance of his attentions his liveliness his mannersit had been a very happy fortnight and forlorn must be the sinkingfrom it into the common course of hartfield days.
to complete everyother recommendation he had almost told her that he loved her.what strength or what constancy of affection he might be subject towas another point but at present she could not doubt his havinga decidedly warm admiration a conscious preference of herselfand this persuasion joined to all the rest made her think thatshe must be a little in love with him in spite of every previousdetermination against it.i certainly must said she.
this sensation of listlessnessweariness stupidity this disinclination to sit down and employ myselfthis feeling of every things being dull and insipid about the housei must be in love i should be the oddest creature in the world if iwere notfor a few weeks at least.
well evil to some is alwaysgood to others.
i shall have many fellowmourners for the ballif not for frank churchill but mr. knightley will be happy.he may spend the evening with his dear william larkins now if he likes.mr.
knightley however shewed no triumphant happiness.
he couldnot say that he was sorry on his own account his very cheerful lookwould have contradicted him if he had but he said and very steadilythat he was sorry for the disappointment of the others and withconsiderable kindness addedyou emma who have so few opportunities of dancing you are reallyout of luck you are very much out of luckit was some days before she saw jane fairfax to judge of herhonest regret in this woeful change but when they did meether composure was odious.
she had been particularly unwell howeversuffering from headache to a degree which made her aunt declarethat had the ball taken place she did not think jane could haveattended it and it was charity to impute some of her unbecomingindifference to the languor of illhealth.chapter xiiiemma continued to entertain no doubt of her being in love.
her ideasonly varied as to the how much.
at first she thought it was a good dealand afterwards but little.
she had great pleasure in hearing frankchurchill talked of and for his sake greater pleasure than everin seeing mr. and mrs. weston she was very often thinking of himand quite impatient for a letter that she might know how he washow were his spirits how was his aunt and what was the chanceof his coming to randalls again this spring.
but on the other handshe could not admit herself to be unhappy nor after thefirst morning to be less disposed for employment than usualshe was still busy and cheerful and pleasing as he was she couldyet imagine him to have faults and farther though thinking of himso much and as she sat drawing or working forming a thousandamusing schemes for the progress and close of their attachmentfancying interesting dialogues and inventing elegant lettersthe conclusion of every imaginary declaration on his side was that sherefused him.
their affection was always to subside into friendship.every thing tender and charming was to mark their partingbut still they were to part.
when she became sensible of thisit struck her that she could not be very much in love for in spiteof her previous and fixed determination never to quit her fathernever to marry a strong attachment certainly must produce moreof a struggle than she could foresee in her own feelings.i do not find myself making any use of the word sacrifice said she.in not one of all my clever replies my delicate negativesis there any allusion to making a sacrifice.
i do suspect that heis not really necessary to my happiness.
so much the better.i certainly will not persuade myself to feel more than i do.
i amquite enough in love.
i should be sorry to be more.upon the whole she was equally contented with her view of his feelings.he is undoubtedly very much in loveevery thing denotes itvery muchin love indeedand when he comes again if his affection continuei must be on my guard not to encourage it.it would be mostinexcusable to do otherwise as my own mind is quite made up.not that i imagine he can think i have been encouraging him hitherto.no if he had believed me at all to share his feelings he wouldnot have been so wretched.
could he have thought himself encouragedhis looks and language at parting would have been different.still however i must be on my guard.
this is in the suppositionof his attachment continuing what it now is but i do not know that iexpect it will i do not look upon him to be quite the sort of mani do not altogether build upon his steadiness or constancy.his feelings are warm but i can imagine them rather changeable.every consideration of the subject in short makes me thankfulthat my happiness is not more deeply involved.i shall do very wellagain after a little whileand then it will be a good thing overfor they say every body is in love once in their lives and i shallhave been let off easily.when his letter to mrs. weston arrived emma had the perusal of itand she read it with a degree of pleasure and admiration which madeher at first shake her head over her own sensations and think shehad undervalued their strength.
it was a long wellwritten lettergiving the particulars of his journey and of his feelingsexpressing all the affection gratitude and respect which wasnatural and honourable and describing every thing exterior and localthat could be supposed attractive with spirit and precision.no suspicious flourishes now of apology or concern it was thelanguage of real feeling towards mrs. weston and the transitionfrom highbury to enscombe the contrast between the places in someof the first blessings of social life was just enough touched onto shew how keenly it was felt and how much more might have beensaid but for the restraints of propriety.the charm of her ownname was not wanting.
miss woodhouse appeared more than onceand never without a something of pleasing connexion either acompliment to her taste or a remembrance of what she had saidand in the very last time of its meeting her eye unadorned as itwas by any such broad wreath of gallantry she yet could discernthe effect of her influence and acknowledge the greatest complimentperhaps of all conveyed.
compressed into the very lowest vacantcorner were these wordsi had not a spare moment on tuesdayas you know for miss woodhouses beautiful little friend.
pray makemy excuses and adieus to her.
this emma could not doubt was allfor herself.
harriet was remembered only from being her friend.his information and prospects as to enscombe were neither worse norbetter than had been anticipated mrs. churchill was recoveringand he dared not yet even in his own imagination fix a time forcoming to randalls again.gratifying however and stimulative as was the letter in thematerial part its sentiments she yet found when it was folded upand returned to mrs. weston that it had not added any lasting warmththat she could still do without the writer and that he must learnto do without her.
her intentions were unchanged.
her resolutionof refusal only grew more interesting by the addition of a scheme forhis subsequent consolation and happiness.
his recollection of harrietand the words which clothed it the beautiful little friendsuggested to her the idea of harriets succeeding her in his affections.was it impossibleno.harriet undoubtedly was greatly hisinferior in understanding but he had been very much struck withthe loveliness of her face and the warm simplicity of her mannerand all the probabilities of circumstance and connexion were inher favour.for harriet it would be advantageous and delightful indeed.i must not dwell upon it said she.i must not think of it.i know the danger of indulging such speculations.
but strangerthings have happened and when we cease to care for each otheras we do now it will be the means of confirming us in that sortof true disinterested friendship which i can already look forwardto with pleasure.it was well to have a comfort in store on harriets behalfthough it might be wise to let the fancy touch it seldom for evilin that quarter was at hand.
as frank churchills arrival hadsucceeded mr. eltons engagement in the conversation of highburyas the latest interest had entirely borne down the first so nowupon frank churchills disappearance mr. eltons concerns wereassuming the most irresistible form.his weddingday was named.he would soon be among them again mr. elton and his bride.there was hardly time to talk over the first letter from enscombebefore mr. elton and his bride was in every bodys mouthand frank churchill was forgotten.
emma grew sick at the sound.she had had three weeks of happy exemption from mr. eltonand harriets mind she had been willing to hope had been latelygaining strength.
with mr. westons ball in view at leastthere had been a great deal of insensibility to other thingsbut it was now too evident that she had not attained such a stateof composure as could stand against the actual approachnew carriagebellringing and all.poor harriet was in a flutter of spirits which required all thereasonings and soothings and attentions of every kind that emmacould give.
emma felt that she could not do too much for herthat harriet had a right to all her ingenuity and all her patiencebut it was heavy work to be for ever convincing without producingany effect for ever agreed to without being able to make their opinionsthe same.
harriet listened submissively and said it was very trueit was just as miss woodhouse describedit was not worth while tothink about themand she would not think about them any longerbut no change of subject could avail and the next halfhoursaw her as anxious and restless about the eltons as before.at last emma attacked her on another ground.your allowing yourself to be so occupied and so unhappy aboutmr.
eltons marrying harriet is the strongest reproach you canmake me.
you could not give me a greater reproof for the mistake ifell into.
it was all my doing i know.
i have not forgotten iti assure you.deceived myself i did very miserably deceive youand it will be a painful reflection to me for ever.
do not imagineme in danger of forgetting it.harriet felt this too much to utter more than a few wordsof eager exclamation.
emma continuedi have not said exert yourself harriet for my sake think lesstalk less of mr. elton for my sake because for your own sake ratheri would wish it to be done for the sake of what is more importantthan my comfort a habit of selfcommand in you a considerationof what is your duty an attention to propriety an endeavourto avoid the suspicions of others to save your health and creditand restore your tranquillity.
these are the motives which ihave been pressing on you.
they are very importantand sorryi am that you cannot feel them sufficiently to act upon them.my being saved from pain is a very secondary consideration.
i wantyou to save yourself from greater pain.
perhaps i may sometimeshave felt that harriet would not forget what was dueor ratherwhat would be kind by me.this appeal to her affections did more than all the rest.the idea of wanting gratitude and consideration for miss woodhousewhom she really loved extremely made her wretched for a whileand when the violence of grief was comforted away still remainedpowerful enough to prompt to what was right and support her in itvery tolerably.you who have been the best friend i ever had in my lifewant gratitude to younobody is equal to youi care for nobodyas i do for youoh  miss woodhouse how ungrateful i have beensuch expressions assisted as they were by every thing that lookand manner could do made emma feel that she had never loved harrietso well nor valued her affection so highly before.there is no charm equal to tenderness of heart said sheafterwards to herself.
there is nothing to be compared to it.warmth and tenderness of heart with an affectionate open mannerwill beat all the clearness of head in the world for attractioni am sure it will.
it is tenderness of heart which makes my dearfather so generally belovedwhich gives isabella all her popularity.i have it notbut i know how to prize and respect it.harriet ismy superior in all the charm and all the felicity it gives.dear harrieti would not change you for the clearestheadedlongestsighted bestjudging female breathing.
oh the coldnessof a jane fairfaxharriet is worth a hundred suchand for a wifea sensible mans wifeit is invaluable.
i mention no namesbut happy the man who changes emma for harrietchapter xivmrs.
elton was first seen at church  but though devotion mightbe interrupted curiosity could not be satisfied by a bride in a pewand it must be left for the visits in form which were then to be paidto settle whether she were very pretty indeed or only rather prettyor not pretty at all.emma had feelings less of curiosity than of pride or proprietyto make her resolve on not being the last to pay her respectsand she made a point of harriets going with her that the worst ofthe business might be gone through as soon as possible.she could not enter the house again could not be in the same roomto which she had with such vain artifice retreated three months agoto lace up her boot without recollecting.
a thousand vexatiousthoughts would recur.
compliments charades and horrible blundersand it was not to be supposed that poor harriet should not berecollecting too but she behaved very well and was only ratherpale and silent.
the visit was of course short and there was somuch embarrassment and occupation of mind to shorten it that emmawould not allow herself entirely to form an opinion of the ladyand on no account to give one beyond the nothingmeaning termsof being elegantly dressed and very pleasing.she did not really like her.
she would not be in a hurry to find faultbut she suspected that there was no eleganceease but not elegance.she was almost sure that for a young woman a stranger a bridethere was too much ease.
her person was rather good her facenot unpretty but neither feature nor air nor voice nor mannerwere elegant.
emma thought at least it would turn out so.as for mr. elton his manners did not appearbut no she wouldnot permit a hasty or a witty word from herself about his manners.it was an awkward ceremony at any time to be receiving wedding visitsand a man had need be all grace to acquit himself well through it.the woman was better off she might have the assistance of fine clothesand the privilege of bashfulness but the man had only his owngood sense to depend on and when she considered how peculiarlyunlucky poor mr. elton was in being in the same room at once withthe woman he had just married the woman he had wanted to marryand the woman whom he had been expected to marry she must allow himto have the right to look as little wise and to be as much affectedlyand as little really easy as could be.well miss woodhouse said harriet when they had quittedthe house and after waiting in vain for her friend to beginwell miss woodhouse with a gentle sigh what do you think of heris not she very charmingthere was a little hesitation in emmas answer.oh yesverya very pleasing young woman.i think her beautiful quite beautiful.very nicely dressed indeed a remarkably elegant gown.i am not at all surprized that he should have fallen in love.oh nothere is nothing to surprize one at all.a pretty fortuneand she came in his way.i dare say returned harriet sighing again i dare say shewas very much attached to him.perhaps she might but it is not every mans fate to marry thewoman who loves him best.
miss hawkins perhaps wanted a homeand thought this the best offer she was likely to have.yes said harriet earnestly and well she might nobody could everhave a better.
well i wish them happy with all my heart.
and nowmiss woodhouse i do not think i shall mind seeing them again.he is just as superior as everbut being married you knowit is quite a different thing.
no indeed miss woodhouse you neednot be afraid i can sit and admire him now without any great misery.to know that he has not thrown himself away is such a comfortshe does seem a charming young woman just what he deserves.happy creature  he called her augusta.
how delightfulwhen the visit was returned emma made up her mind.
she could thensee more and judge better.
from harriets happening not to beat hartfield and her fathers being present to engage mr. eltonshe had a quarter of an hour of the ladys conversation to herselfand could composedly attend to her and the quarter of an hour quiteconvinced her that mrs. elton was a vain woman extremely wellsatisfied with herself and thinking much of her own importancethat she meant to shine and be very superior but with manners whichhad been formed in a bad school pert and familiar that all hernotions were drawn from one set of people and one style of livingthat if not foolish she was ignorant and that her society wouldcertainly do mr. elton no good.harriet would have been a better match.
if not wise or refined herselfshe would have connected him with those who were but miss hawkinsit might be fairly supposed from her easy conceit had been the bestof her own set.
the rich brotherinlaw near bristol was the prideof the alliance and his place and his carriages were the prideof him.the very first subject after being seated was maple grove my brothermr.
sucklings seata comparison of hartfield to maple grove.the grounds of hartfield were small but neat and pretty and thehouse was modern and wellbuilt.
mrs. elton seemed most favourablyimpressed by the size of the room the entrance and all that shecould see or imagine.
very like maple grove indeedshe was quitestruck by the likenessthat room was the very shape and sizeof the morningroom at maple grove her sisters favourite room.mr.
elton was appealed to.was not it astonishingly likeshe could really almost fancy herself at maple grove.and the staircaseyou know as i came in i observed how very likethe staircase was placed exactly in the same part of the house.i really could not help exclaiming  i assure you miss woodhouseit is very delightful to me to be reminded of a place i am soextremely partial to as maple grove.
i have spent so many happymonths there with a little sigh of sentiment.
a charming placeundoubtedly.
every body who sees it is struck by its beautybut to me it has been quite a home.
whenever you are transplantedlike me miss woodhouse you will understand how very delightful itis to meet with any thing at all like what one has left behind.i always say this is quite one of the evils of matrimony.emma made as slight a reply as she could but it was fully sufficientfor mrs. elton who only wanted to be talking herself.so extremely like maple grove  and it is not merely the housethe grounds i assure you as far as i could observe are strikinglylike.
the laurels at maple grove are in the same profusion as hereand stand very much in the same wayjust across the lawnand i had a glimpse of a fine large tree with a bench round itwhich put me so exactly in mind  my brother and sister will beenchanted with this place.
people who have extensive groundsthemselves are always pleased with any thing in the same style.emma doubted the truth of this sentiment.
she had a great ideathat people who had extensive grounds themselves cared very littlefor the extensive grounds of any body else but it was not worthwhile to attack an error so doubledyed and therefore only saidin replywhen you have seen more of this country i am afraid you will thinkyou have overrated hartfield.
surry is full of beauties.oh yes i am quite aware of that.
it is the garden of englandyou know.
surry is the garden of england.yes but we must not rest our claims on that distinction.many counties i believe are called the garden of englandas well as surry.no i fancy not replied mrs. elton with a most satisfied smile.i never heard any county but surry called so.emma was silenced.my brother and sister have promised us a visit in the springor summer at farthest continued mrs. elton and that will beour time for exploring.
while they are with us we shall explorea great deal i dare say.
they will have their barouchelandauof course which holds four perfectly and therefore without sayingany thing of our carriage we should be able to explore the differentbeauties extremely well.
they would hardly come in their chaisei think at that season of the year.
indeed when the time draws oni shall decidedly recommend their bringing the barouchelandauit will be so very much preferable.
when people come into a beautifulcountry of this sort you know miss woodhouse one naturally wishesthem to see as much as possible and mr. suckling is extremely fondof exploring.
we explored to kingsweston twice last summerin that way most delightfully just after their first having thebarouchelandau.
you have many parties of that kind here i supposemiss woodhouse every summerno not immediately here.
we are rather out of distance of the verystriking beauties which attract the sort of parties you speak ofand we are a very quiet set of people i believe more disposedto stay at home than engage in schemes of pleasure.ah there is nothing like staying at home for real comfort.nobody can be more devoted to home than i am.
i was quitea proverb for it at maple grove.
many a time has selina saidwhen she has been going to bristol i really cannot get this girlto move from the house.
i absolutely must go in by myself though ihate being stuck up in the barouchelandau without a companionbut augusta i believe with her own goodwill would never stirbeyond the park paling.
many a time has she said so and yet iam no advocate for entire seclusion.
i think on the contrarywhen people shut themselves up entirely from society it is a verybad thing and that it is much more advisable to mix in the world ina proper degree without living in it either too much or too little.i perfectly understand your situation however miss woodhouselooking towards mr. woodhouse your fathers state of health mustbe a great drawback.
why does not he try bathindeed he should.let me recommend bath to you.
i assure you i have no doubt of its doingmr.
woodhouse good.my father tried it more than once formerly but without receivingany benefit and mr. perry whose name i dare say is not unknownto you does not conceive it would be at all more likely to beuseful now.ah thats a great pity for i assure you miss woodhousewhere the waters do agree it is quite wonderful the reliefthey give.
in my bath life i have seen such instances of itand it is so cheerful a place that it could not fail of being ofuse to mr. woodhouses spirits which i understand are sometimesmuch depressed.
and as to its recommendations to you i fancy ineed not take much pains to dwell on them.
the advantages of bathto the young are pretty generally understood.
it would be a charmingintroduction for you who have lived so secluded a life and i couldimmediately secure you some of the best society in the place.a line from me would bring you a little host of acquaintance and myparticular friend mrs. partridge the lady i have always residedwith when in bath would be most happy to shew you any attentionsand would be the very person for you to go into public with.it was as much as emma could bear without being impolite.the idea of her being indebted to mrs. elton for what was calledan introductionof her going into public under the auspicesof a friend of mrs. eltonsprobably some vulgar dashing widowwho with the help of a boarder just made a shift to livethe dignity of miss woodhouse of hartfield was sunk indeedshe restrained herself however from any of the reproofs she couldhave given and only thanked mrs. elton coolly but their goingto bath was quite out of the question and she was not perfectlyconvinced that the place might suit her better than her father.and then to prevent farther outrage and indignation changed thesubject directly.i do not ask whether you are musical mrs. elton.
upon these occasionsa ladys character generally precedes her and highbury has longknown that you are a superior performer.oh no indeed i must protest against any such idea.a superior performervery far from it i assure you.consider from how partial a quarter your information came.i am doatingly fond of musicpassionately fondand my friendssay i am not entirely devoid of taste but as to any thing elseupon my honour my performance is mediocre to the last degree.you miss woodhouse i well know play delightfully.
i assure youit has been the greatest satisfaction comfort and delight to meto hear what a musical society i am got into.
i absolutely cannotdo without music.
it is a necessary of life to me and having alwaysbeen used to a very musical society both at maple grove and in bathit would have been a most serious sacrifice.
i honestly said as muchto mr. e. when he was speaking of my future home and expressinghis fears lest the retirement of it should be disagreeableand the inferiority of the house tooknowing what i had beenaccustomed toof course he was not wholly without apprehension.when he was speaking of it in that way i honestly said that theworld i could give upparties balls playsfor i had no fearof retirement.
blessed with so many resources within myselfthe world was not necessary to me.
i could do very well without it.to those who had no resources it was a different thing but myresources made me quite independent.
and as to smallersized roomsthan i had been used to i really could not give it a thought.i hoped i was perfectly equal to any sacrifice of that description.certainly i had been accustomed to every luxury at maple grove but idid assure him that two carriages were not necessary to my happinessnor were spacious apartments.
but said i to be quite honesti do not think i can live without something of a musical society.i condition for nothing else but without music life would be a blankto me.we cannot suppose said emma smiling that mr. elton would hesitateto assure you of there being a very musical society in highburyand i hope you will not find he has outstepped the truth more thanmay be pardoned in consideration of the motive.no indeed i have no doubts at all on that head.
i am delightedto find myself in such a circle.
i hope we shall have many sweetlittle concerts together.
i think miss woodhouse you and imust establish a musical club and have regular weekly meetingsat your house or ours.
will not it be a good plan  if weexert ourselves i think we shall not be long in want of allies.something of that nature would be particularly desirable for meas an inducement to keep me in practice for married women you knowthere is a sad story against them in general.
they are but too aptto give up music.but you who are so extremely fond of itthere canbe no danger surelyi should hope not but really when i look around among my acquaintancei tremble.
selina has entirely given up musicnever touchesthe instrumentthough she played sweetly.
and the same may be saidof mrs. jeffereysclara partridge that wasand of the two milmansnow mrs. bird and mrs. james cooper and of more than i can enumerate.upon my word it is enough to put one in a fright.
i used to bequite angry with selina but really i begin now to comprehendthat a married woman has many things to call her attention.i believe i was half an hour this morning shut up with my housekeeper.but every thing of that kind said emma will soonbe in so regular a trainwell said mrs. elton laughing we shall see.emma finding her so determined upon neglecting her musichad nothing more to say and after a moments pause mrs. eltonchose another subject.we have been calling at randalls said she and found themboth at home and very pleasant people they seem to be.i like them extremely.
mr. weston seems an excellent creaturequite a firstrate favourite with me already i assure you.and she appears so truly goodthere is something so motherlyand kindhearted about her that it wins upon one directly.she was your governess i thinkemma was almost too much astonished to answer but mrs. eltonhardly waited for the affirmative before she went on.having understood as much i was rather astonished to find herso very ladylike  but she is really quite the gentlewoman.mrs.
westons manners said emma were always particularly good.their propriety simplicity and elegance would make them the safestmodel for any young woman.and who do you think came in while we were thereemma was quite at a loss.
the tone implied some old acquaintanceand how could she possibly guessknightley continued mrs. elton knightley himselfwas notit luckyfor not being within when he called the other dayi had never seen him before and of course as so particular afriend of mr. e.s i had a great curiosity.
my friend knightleyhad been so often mentioned that i was really impatient to see himand i must do my caro sposo the justice to say that he need notbe ashamed of his friend.
knightley is quite the gentleman.i like him very much.
decidedly i think a very gentlemanlike man.happily it was now time to be gone.
they were off and emmacould breathe.insufferable woman was her immediate exclamation.
worse than ihad supposed.
absolutely insufferable  knightleyi could nothave believed it.
knightleynever seen him in her life beforeand call him knightleyand discover that he is a gentlemana little upstart vulgar being with her mr. e. and her caro sposoand her resources and all her airs of pert pretension andunderbred finery.
actually to discover that mr. knightley isa gentleman  i doubt whether he will return the complimentand discover her to be a lady.
i could not have believed itand to propose that she and i should unite to form a musical clubone would fancy we were bosom friends  and mrs. westonastonished that the person who had brought me up should bea gentlewoman  worse and worse.
i never met with her equal.much beyond my hopes.
harriet is disgraced by any comparison.oh what would frank churchill say to her if he were herehow angry and how diverted he would be  ah there i amthinking of him directly.
always the first person to be thought ofhow i catch myself out  frank churchill comes as regularly intomy mindall this ran so glibly through her thoughts that by the timeher father had arranged himself after the bustle of the eltonsdeparture and was ready to speak she was very tolerably capableof attending.well my dear he deliberately began considering we never sawher before she seems a very pretty sort of young lady and i dare sayshe was very much pleased with you.
she speaks a little too quick.a little quickness of voice there is which rather hurts the ear.but i believe i am nice i do not like strange voices and nobody speakslike you and poor miss taylor.
however she seems a very obligingprettybehaved young lady and no doubt will make him a very good wife.though i think he had better not have married.
i made the bestexcuses i could for not having been able to wait on him and mrs. eltonon this happy occasion i said that i hoped i should in the courseof the summer.
but i ought to have gone before.
not to wait upona bride is very remiss.
ah it shews what a sad invalid i ambut i do not like the corner into vicarage lane.i dare say your apologies were accepted sir.
mr. elton knows you.yes  but a young ladya bridei ought to have paid my respectsto her if possible.
it was being very deficient.but my dear papa you are no friend to matrimony and thereforewhy should you be so anxious to pay your respects to a brideit ought to be no recommendation to you.
it is encouraging peopleto marry if you make so much of them.no my dear i never encouraged any body to marry but i wouldalways wish to pay every proper attention to a ladyand a brideespecially is never to be neglected.
more is avowedly due to her.a bride you know my dear is always the first in companylet the others be who they may.well papa if this is not encouragement to marry i do not knowwhat is.
and i should never have expected you to be lending yoursanction to such vanitybaits for poor young ladies.my dear you do not understand me.
this is amatter of mere common politeness and goodbreedingand has nothing to do with any encouragement to people to marry.emma had done.
her father was growing nervous and could notunderstand her.
her mind returned to mrs. eltons offencesand long very long did they occupy her.chapter xvemma was not required by any subsequent discovery to retract her illopinion of mrs. elton.
her observation had been pretty correct.such as mrs. elton appeared to her on this second interviewsuch she appeared whenever they met againselfimportant presumingfamiliar ignorant and illbred.
she had a little beauty and alittle accomplishment but so little judgment that she thought herselfcoming with superior knowledge of the world to enliven and improvea country neighbourhood and conceived miss hawkins to have heldsuch a place in society as mrs. eltons consequence only could surpass.there was no reason to suppose mr. elton thought at all differentlyfrom his wife.
he seemed not merely happy with her but proud.he had the air of congratulating himself on having brought sucha woman to highbury as not even miss woodhouse could equaland the greater part of her new acquaintance disposed to commendor not in the habit of judging following the lead of miss batessgoodwill or taking it for granted that the bride must be as cleverand as agreeable as she professed herself were very well satisfiedso that mrs. eltons praise passed from one mouth to another as itought to do unimpeded by miss woodhouse who readily continued herfirst contribution and talked with a good grace of her being verypleasant and very elegantly dressed.in one respect mrs. elton grew even worse than she had appearedat first.
her feelings altered towards emma.offended probablyby the little encouragement which her proposals of intimacy met withshe drew back in her turn and gradually became much more coldand distant and though the effect was agreeable the illwillwhich produced it was necessarily increasing emmas dislike.her manners tooand mr. eltons were unpleasant towards harriet.they were sneering and negligent.
emma hoped it must rapidly workharriets cure but the sensations which could prompt such behavioursunk them both very much.it was not to be doubted that poorharriets attachment had been an offering to conjugal unreserveand her own share in the story under a colouring the least favourableto her and the most soothing to him had in all likelihood beengiven also.
she was of course the object of their joint dislike.when they had nothing else to say it must be always easy to beginabusing miss woodhouse and the enmity which they dared not shewin open disrespect to her found a broader vent in contemptuoustreatment of harriet.mrs.
elton took a great fancy to jane fairfax and from the first.not merely when a state of warfare with one young lady might besupposed to recommend the other but from the very first and shewas not satisfied with expressing a natural and reasonable admirationbut without solicitation or plea or privilege she must be wantingto assist and befriend her.before emma had forfeited her confidenceand about the third time of their meeting she heard all mrs. eltonsknighterrantry on the subject.jane fairfax is absolutely charming miss woodhouse.i quiterave about jane fairfax.a sweet interesting creature.
so mildand ladylikeand with such talentsi assure you i think shehas very extraordinary talents.
i do not scruple to say that sheplays extremely well.
i know enough of music to speak decidedlyon that point.
oh she is absolutely charming  you will laugh atmy warmthbut upon my word i talk of nothing but jane fairfax.and her situation is so calculated to affect onemiss woodhousewe must exert ourselves and endeavour to do something for her.we must bring her forward.
such talent as hers must not be sufferedto remain unknown.i dare say you have heard those charming lines ofthe poet        full many a flower is born to blush unseen          and waste its fragrance on the desert air.we must not allow them to be verified in sweet jane fairfax.i cannot think there is any danger of it was emmas calm answerand when you are better acquainted with miss fairfaxs situationand understand what her home has been with colonel and mrs. campbelli have no idea that you will suppose her talents can be unknown.oh but dear miss woodhouse she is now in such retirementsuch obscurity so thrown away.whatever advantages she may haveenjoyed with the campbells are so palpably at an end  and i thinkshe feels it.
i am sure she does.
she is very timid and silent.one can see that she feels the want of encouragement.
i like herthe better for it.
i must confess it is a recommendation to me.i am a great advocate for timidityand i am sure one doesnot often meet with it.but in those who are at all inferiorit is extremely prepossessing.
oh  i assure you jane fairfaxis a very delightful character and interests me more than ican express.you appear to feel a great dealbut i am not aware how you or anyof miss fairfaxs acquaintance here any of those who have knownher longer than yourself can shew her any other attention thanmy dear miss woodhouse a vast deal may be done by those who dareto act.
you and i need not be afraid.
if we set the examplemany will follow it as far as they can though all have notour situations.
we have carriages to fetch and convey her homeand we live in a style which could not make the addition ofjane fairfax at any time the least inconvenient.i should beextremely displeased if wright were to send us up such a dinneras could make me regret having asked more than jane fairfaxto partake of it.
i have no idea of that sort of thing.
it isnot likely that i should considering what i have been used to.my greatest danger perhaps in housekeeping may be quite theother way in doing too much and being too careless of expense.maple grove will probably be my model more than it ought to befor we do not at all affect to equal my brother mr. sucklingin income.however my resolution is taken as to noticing jane fairfax.i shall certainly have her very often at my house shall introduceher wherever i can shall have musical parties to draw out her talentsand shall be constantly on the watch for an eligible situation.my acquaintance is so very extensive that i have little doubtof hearing of something to suit her shortly.i shall introduce herof course very particularly to my brother and sister when they cometo us.
i am sure they will like her extremely and when she getsa little acquainted with them her fears will completely wear offfor there really is nothing in the manners of either but what ishighly conciliating.i shall have her very often indeed while theyare with me and i dare say we shall sometimes find a seat for her inthe barouchelandau in some of our exploring parties.poor jane fairfaxthought emma.you have not deserved this.you may have done wrong with regard to mr. dixon but this is apunishment beyond what you can have meritedthe kindness and protectionof mrs. eltonjane fairfax and jane fairfax.
heavens  let menot suppose that she dares go about emma woodhouseing mebut upon my honour there seems no limits to the licentiousnessof that womans tongueemma had not to listen to such paradings againto any so exclusivelyaddressed to herselfso disgustingly decorated with a dear misswoodhouse.
the change on mrs. eltons side soon afterwards appearedand she was left in peaceneither forced to be the very particularfriend of mrs. elton nor under mrs. eltons guidance the veryactive patroness of jane fairfax and only sharing with others in ageneral way in knowing what was felt what was meditated what was done.she looked on with some amusement.miss batess gratitude formrs.
eltons attentions to jane was in the first style of guilelesssimplicity and warmth.
she was quite one of her worthiesthe most amiable affable delightful womanjust as accomplishedand condescending as mrs. elton meant to be considered.emmas only surprize was that jane fairfax should acceptthose attentions and tolerate mrs. elton as she seemed to do.she heard of her walking with the eltons sitting with the eltonsspending a day with the eltons  this was astonishingshe could nothave believed it possible that the taste or the pride of miss fairfaxcould endure such society and friendship as the vicarage had to offer.she is a riddle quite a riddle said she.to chuse to remainhere month after month under privations of every sort  and nowto chuse the mortification of mrs. eltons notice and the penuryof her conversation rather than return to the superior companionswho have always loved her with such real generous affection.jane had come to highbury professedly for three months the campbellswere gone to ireland for three months but now the campbellshad promised their daughter to stay at least till midsummerand fresh invitations had arrived for her to join them there.according to miss batesit all came from hermrs.
dixon hadwritten most pressingly.
would jane but go means were to be foundservants sent friends contrivedno travelling difficulty allowedto exist but still she had declined itshe must have some motive more powerful than appears for refusingthis invitation was emmas conclusion.
she must be under somesort of penance inflicted either by the campbells or herself.there is great fear great caution great resolution somewhere.she is not to be with the dixons.
the decree is issued by somebody.but why must she consent to be with the eltonshere is quite aseparate puzzle.upon her speaking her wonder aloud on that part of the subjectbefore the few who knew her opinion of mrs. elton mrs. westonventured this apology for jane.we cannot suppose that she has any great enjoyment at the vicaragemy dear emmabut it is better than being always at home.her aunt is a good creature but as a constant companionmust be very tiresome.
we must consider what miss fairfax quitsbefore we condemn her taste for what she goes to.you are right mrs. weston said mr. knightley warmly miss fairfaxis as capable as any of us of forming a just opinion of mrs. elton.could she have chosen with whom to associate she would not havechosen her.
but with a reproachful smile at emma she receivesattentions from mrs. elton which nobody else pays her.emma felt that mrs. weston was giving her a momentary glanceand she was herself struck by his warmth.
with a faint blushshe presently repliedsuch attentions as mrs. eltons i should have imaginedwould rather disgust than gratify miss fairfax.
mrs. eltonsinvitations i should have imagined any thing but inviting.i should not wonder said mrs. weston if miss fairfax were to havebeen drawn on beyond her own inclination by her aunts eagernessin accepting mrs. eltons civilities for her.
poor miss bates mayvery likely have committed her niece and hurried her into a greaterappearance of intimacy than her own good sense would have dictatedin spite of the very natural wish of a little change.both felt rather anxious to hear him speak again and after a fewminutes silence he saidanother thing must be taken into consideration toomrs.
eltondoes not talk to miss fairfax as she speaks of her.
we all knowthe difference between the pronouns he or she and thou the plainestspoken amongst us we all feel the influence of a something beyondcommon civility in our personal intercourse with each othera something more early implanted.
we cannot give any body thedisagreeable hints that we may have been very full of the hour before.we feel things differently.
and besides the operation of thisas a general principle you may be sure that miss fairfax awesmrs.
elton by her superiority both of mind and manner and thatface to face mrs. elton treats her with all the respect which shehas a claim to.
such a woman as jane fairfax probably never fellin mrs. eltons way beforeand no degree of vanity can preventher acknowledging her own comparative littleness in action if notin consciousness.i know how highly you think of jane fairfax said emma.little henry was in her thoughts and a mixture of alarm and delicacymade her irresolute what else to say.yes he replied any body may know how highly i think of her.and yet said emma beginning hastily and with an arch lookbut soon stoppingit was better however to know the worst at onceshe hurried onand yet perhaps you may hardly be aware yourselfhow highly it is.
the extent of your admiration may take you bysurprize some day or other.mr.
knightley was hard at work upon the lower buttons of his thickleather gaiters and either the exertion of getting them togetheror some other cause brought the colour into his face as he answeredoh are you therebut you are miserably behindhand.
mr. colegave me a hint of it six weeks ago.he stopped.emma felt her foot pressed by mrs. weston and didnot herself know what to think.
in a moment he went onthat will never be however i can assure you.
miss fairfaxi dare say would not have me if i were to ask herand i am verysure i shall never ask her.emma returned her friends pressure with interest and was pleasedenough to exclaimyou are not vain mr. knightley.
i will say that for you.he seemed hardly to hear her he was thoughtfuland in a mannerwhich shewed him not pleased soon afterwards saidso you have been settling that i should marry jane fairfaxno indeed i have not.
you have scolded me too much for matchmakingfor me to presume to take such a liberty with you.
what i saidjust now meant nothing.
one says those sort of things of coursewithout any idea of a serious meaning.
oh no upon my word i have notthe smallest wish for your marrying jane fairfax or jane any body.you would not come in and sit with us in this comfortable wayif you were married.mr.
knightley was thoughtful again.
the result of his reverie wasno emma i do not think the extent of my admiration for her willever take me by surprize.i never had a thought of her in that wayi assure you.
and soon afterwards jane fairfax is a very charmingyoung womanbut not even jane fairfax is perfect.
she has a fault.she has not the open temper which a man would wish for in a wife.emma could not but rejoice to hear that she had a fault.well said she and you soon silenced mr. cole i supposeyes very soon.
he gave me a quiet hint i told him he was mistakenhe asked my pardon and said no more.
cole does not want to be wiseror wittier than his neighbours.in that respect how unlike dear mrs. elton who wants to be wiserand wittier than all the world  i wonder how she speaks of the coleswhat she calls them  how can she find any appellation for themdeep enough in familiar vulgarity  she calls you knightleywhat canshe do for mr. cole  and so i am not to be surprized that janefairfax accepts her civilities and consents to be with her.mrs.
weston your argument weighs most with me.
i can much morereadily enter into the temptation of getting away from miss batesthan i can believe in the triumph of miss fairfaxs mind overmrs.
elton.
i have no faith in mrs. eltons acknowledging herselfthe inferior in thought word or deed or in her being under anyrestraint beyond her own scanty rule of goodbreeding.
i cannotimagine that she will not be continually insulting her visitorwith praise encouragement and offers of service that she will not becontinually detailing her magnificent intentions from the procuringher a permanent situation to the including her in those delightfulexploring parties which are to take place in the barouchelandau.jane fairfax has feeling said mr. knightleyi do notaccuse her of want of feeling.
her sensibilities i suspectare strongand her temper excellent in its power of forbearancepatience selfcontroul but it wants openness.
she is reservedmore reserved i think than she used to beand i love anopen temper.
notill cole alluded to my supposed attachmentit had never entered my head.
i saw jane fairfax and conversed withher with admiration and pleasure alwaysbut with no thought beyond.well mrs. weston said emma triumphantly when he left themwhat do you say now to mr. knightleys marrying jane fairfaxwhy really dear emma i say that he is so very much occupiedby the idea of not being in love with her that i should not wonderif it were to end in his being so at last.
do not beat me.chapter xvievery body in and about highbury who had ever visited mr. eltonwas disposed to pay him attention on his marriage.
dinnerparties andeveningparties were made for him and his lady and invitationsflowed in so fast that she had soon the pleasure of apprehendingthey were never to have a disengaged day.i see how it is said she.
i see what a life i am to leadamong you.
upon my word we shall be absolutely dissipated.we really seem quite the fashion.
if this is living in the countryit is nothing very formidable.
from monday next to saturdayi assure you we have not a disengaged daya woman with fewerresources than i have need not have been at a loss.no invitation came amiss to her.
her bath habits made eveningpartiesperfectly natural to her and maple grove had given her a tastefor dinners.
she was a little shocked at the want of twodrawing rooms at the poor attempt at routcakes and there beingno ice in the highbury cardparties.
mrs. bates mrs. perrymrs.
goddard and others were a good deal behindhand in knowledgeof the world but she would soon shew them how every thing oughtto be arranged.
in the course of the spring she must return theircivilities by one very superior partyin which her cardtablesshould be set out with their separate candles and unbroken packsin the true styleand more waiters engaged for the eveningthan their own establishment could furnish to carry roundthe refreshments at exactly the proper hour and in the proper order.emma in the meanwhile could not be satisfied without a dinnerat hartfield for the eltons.
they must not do less than othersor she should be exposed to odious suspicions and imagined capableof pitiful resentment.
a dinner there must be.
after emma hadtalked about it for ten minutes mr. woodhouse felt no unwillingnessand only made the usual stipulation of not sitting at the bottomof the table himself with the usual regular difficulty of decidingwho should do it for him.the persons to be invited required little thought.
besides the eltonsit must be the westons and mr. knightley so far it was all of courseand it was hardly less inevitable that poor little harriet mustbe asked to make the eighthbut this invitation was not givenwith equal satisfaction and on many accounts emma was particularlypleased by harriets begging to be allowed to decline it.she would rather not be in his company more than she could help.she was not yet quite able to see him and his charming happywife together without feeling uncomfortable.
if miss woodhousewould not be displeased she would rather stay at home.it was precisely what emma would have wished had she deemed itpossible enough for wishing.
she was delighted with the fortitudeof her little friendfor fortitude she knew it was in her to giveup being in company and stay at home and she could now invite thevery person whom she really wanted to make the eighth jane fairfax.since her last conversation with mrs. weston and mr. knightleyshe was more consciencestricken about jane fairfax than she hadoften been.mr.
knightleys words dwelt with her.
he had saidthat jane fairfax received attentions from mrs. elton which nobodyelse paid her.this is very true said she at least as far as relates to mewhich was all that was meantand it is very shameful.of the same ageand always knowing heri ought to have been more her friend.she will never like me now.
i have neglected her too long.
but iwill shew her greater attention than i have done.every invitation was successful.
they were all disengaged and all happy.the preparatory interest of this dinner however was not yet over.a circumstance rather unlucky occurred.
the two eldest littleknightleys were engaged to pay their grandpapa and aunt a visit ofsome weeks in the spring and their papa now proposed bringing themand staying one whole day at hartfieldwhich one day would bethe very day of this party.his professional engagements didnot allow of his being put off but both father and daughter weredisturbed by its happening so.
mr. woodhouse considered eightpersons at dinner together as the utmost that his nerves could bearand here would be a ninthand emma apprehended that it wouldbe a ninth very much out of humour at not being able to come evento hartfield for fortyeight hours without falling in with a dinnerparty.she comforted her father better than she could comfort herselfby representing that though he certainly would make them nineyet he always said so little that the increase of noise would bevery immaterial.
she thought it in reality a sad exchange for herselfto have him with his grave looks and reluctant conversation opposedto her instead of his brother.the event was more favourable to mr. woodhouse than to emma.john knightley came but mr. weston was unexpectedly summoned to townand must be absent on the very day.
he might be able to join themin the evening but certainly not to dinner.
mr. woodhouse was quiteat ease and the seeing him so with the arrival of the little boysand the philosophic composure of her brother on hearing his fateremoved the chief of even emmas vexation.the day came the party were punctually assembled and mr. john knightleyseemed early to devote himself to the business of being agreeable.instead of drawing his brother off to a window while they waitedfor dinner he was talking to miss fairfax.
mrs. elton as elegantas lace and pearls could make her he looked at in silencewanting only to observe enough for isabellas informationbut missfairfax was an old acquaintance and a quiet girl and he couldtalk to her.
he had met her before breakfast as he was returningfrom a walk with his little boys when it had been just beginningto rain.
it was natural to have some civil hopes on the subjectand he saidi hope you did not venture far miss fairfax this morning or iam sure you must have been wet.we scarcely got home in time.i hope you turned directly.i went only to the postoffice said she and reached homebefore the rain was much.
it is my daily errand.
i always fetchthe letters when i am here.
it saves trouble and is a somethingto get me out.
a walk before breakfast does me good.not a walk in the rain i should imagine.no but it did not absolutely rain when i set out.mr.
john knightley smiled and repliedthat is to say you chose to have your walk for you were not sixyards from your own door when i had the pleasure of meeting youand henry and john had seen more drops than they could count long before.the postoffice has a great charm at one period of our lives.when you have lived to my age you will begin to think letters arenever worth going through the rain for.there was a little blush and then this answeri must not hope to be ever situated as you are in the midst ofevery dearest connexion and therefore i cannot expect that simplygrowing older should make me indifferent about letters.indifferent  oh noi never conceived you could become indifferent.letters are no matter of indifference they are generally a verypositive curse.you are speaking of letters of business mine are lettersof friendship.i have often thought them the worst of the two replied he coolly.business you know may bring money but friendship hardlyever does.ah you are not serious now.
i know mr. john knightley too welli am very sure he understands the value of friendship as well asany body.
i can easily believe that letters are very little to youmuch less than to me but it is not your being ten years older thanmyself which makes the difference it is not age but situation.you have every body dearest to you always at hand i probablynever shall again and therefore till i have outlived all my affectionsa postoffice i think must always have power to draw me outin worse weather than today.when i talked of your being altered by time by the progress of yearssaid john knightley i meant to imply the change of situationwhich time usually brings.
i consider one as including the other.time will generally lessen the interest of every attachment not withinthe daily circlebut that is not the change i had in view for you.as an old friend you will allow me to hope miss fairfax that tenyears hence you may have as many concentrated objects as i have.it was kindly said and very far from giving offence.
a pleasantthank you seemed meant to laugh it off but a blush a quivering lipa tear in the eye shewed that it was felt beyond a laugh.her attention was now claimed by mr. woodhouse who beingaccording to his custom on such occasions making the circle ofhis guests and paying his particular compliments to the ladieswas ending with herand with all his mildest urbanity saidi am very sorry to hear miss fairfax of your being out thismorning in the rain.
young ladies should take care of themselves.young ladies are delicate plants.
they should take care of theirhealth and their complexion.
my dear did you change your stockingsyes sir i did indeed and i am very much obliged by your kindsolicitude about me.my dear miss fairfax young ladies are very sure to be cared for.i hope your good grandmama and aunt are well.
they are someof my very old friends.
i wish my health allowed me to be abetter neighbour.
you do us a great deal of honour today i am sure.my daughter and i are both highly sensible of your goodnessand have the greatest satisfaction in seeing you at hartfield.the kindhearted polite old man might then sit down and feelthat he had done his duty and made every fair lady welcome and easy.by this time the walk in the rain had reached mrs. eltonand her remonstrances now opened upon jane.my dear jane what is this i heargoing to the postofficein the rainthis must not be i assure you.you sad girlhow could you do such a thingit is a sign i was not thereto take care of you.jane very patiently assured her that she had not caught any cold.oh do not tell me.
you really are a very sad girl and do notknow how to take care of yourself.to the postoffice indeedmrs.
weston did you ever hear the like  you and i must positivelyexert our authority.my advice said mrs. weston kindly and persuasively i certainlydo feel tempted to give.
miss fairfax you must not run such risks.liable as you have been to severe colds indeed you oughtto be particularly careful especially at this time of year.the spring i always think requires more than common care.better wait an hour or two or even half a day for your lettersthan run the risk of bringing on your cough again.
now do not youfeel that you had  yes i am sure you are much too reasonable.you look as if you would not do such a thing again.oh she shall not do such a thing again eagerly rejoinedmrs.
elton.
we will not allow her to do such a thing againand nodding significantlythere must be some arrangement madethere must indeed.
i shall speak to mr. e. the man who fetchesour letters every morning one of our men i forget his nameshall inquire for yours too and bring them to you.
that will obviateall difficulties you know and from us i really think my dear janeyou can have no scruple to accept such an accommodation.you are extremely kind said jane but i cannot give up myearly walk.
i am advised to be out of doors as much as i cani must walk somewhere and the postoffice is an object and uponmy word i have scarcely ever had a bad morning before.my dear jane say no more about it.
the thing is determinedthat is laughing affectedly as far as i can presume to determineany thing without the concurrence of my lord and master.
you knowmrs.
weston you and i must be cautious how we express ourselves.but i do flatter myself my dear jane that my influence is not entirelyworn out.
if i meet with no insuperable difficulties thereforeconsider that point as settled.excuse me said jane earnestly i cannot by any means consentto such an arrangement so needlessly troublesome to your servant.if the errand were not a pleasure to me it could be done as italways is when i am not here by my grandmamas.oh my dear but so much as patty has to doand it is a kindnessto employ our men.jane looked as if she did not mean to be conquered but insteadof answering she began speaking again to mr. john knightley.the postoffice is a wonderful establishment said she.the regularity and despatch of it  if one thinks of all that ithas to do and all that it does so well it is really astonishingit is certainly very well regulated.so seldom that any negligence or blunder appears  so seldomthat a letter among the thousands that are constantly passingabout the kingdom is even carried wrongand not one in a millioni suppose actually lost  and when one considers the varietyof hands and of bad hands too that are to be decipheredit increases the wonder.the clerks grow expert from habit.they must begin with somequickness of sight and hand and exercise improves them.
if youwant any farther explanation continued he smiling they arepaid for it.
that is the key to a great deal of capacity.the public pays and must be served well.the varieties of handwriting were farther talked of and the usualobservations made.i have heard it asserted said john knightley that the samesort of handwriting often prevails in a family and where thesame master teaches it is natural enough.
but for that reasoni should imagine the likeness must be chiefly confined to the femalesfor boys have very little teaching after an early age and scrambleinto any hand they can get.
isabella and emma i think do writevery much alike.
i have not always known their writing apart.yes said his brother hesitatingly there is a likeness.i know what you meanbut emmas hand is the strongest.isabella and emma both write beautifully said mr. woodhouseand always did.
and so does poor mrs. westonwith half a sighand half a smile at her.i never saw any gentlemans handwritingemma began looking alsoat mrs. weston but stopped on perceiving that mrs. weston wasattending to some one elseand the pause gave her time to reflectnow how am i going to introduce himam i unequal to speakinghis name at once before all these people  is it necessaryfor me to use any roundabout phraseyour yorkshire friendyour correspondent in yorkshirethat would be the way i supposeif i were very bad.no i can pronounce his name without thesmallest distress.
i certainly get better and better.now for it.mrs.
weston was disengaged and emma began againmr.
frank churchillwrites one of the best gentlemans hands i ever saw.i do not admire it said mr. knightley.
it is too smallwants strength.
it is like a womans writing.this was not submitted to by either lady.
they vindicated himagainst the base aspersion.
no it by no means wanted strengthit was not a large hand but very clear and certainly strong.had not mrs. weston any letter about her to produce  no she hadheard from him very lately but having answered the letter had putit away.if we were in the other room said emma if i had my writingdeski am sure i could produce a specimen.
i have a note of his.do not you remember mrs. weston employing him to write for youone dayhe chose to say he was employedwell well i have that note and can shew it after dinnerto convince mr. knightley.oh when a gallant young man like mr. frank churchillsaid mr. knightley dryly writes to a fair lady like miss woodhousehe will of course put forth his best.dinner was on table.mrs.
elton before she could be spoken towas ready and before mr. woodhouse had reached her with his requestto be allowed to hand her into the diningparlour was sayingmust i go first  i really am ashamed of always leading the way.janes solicitude about fetching her own letters had not escaped emma.she had heard and seen it all and felt some curiosity to knowwhether the wet walk of this morning had produced any.
she suspectedthat it had that it would not have been so resolutely encounteredbut in full expectation of hearing from some one very dearand that it had not been in vain.
she thought there was an airof greater happiness than usuala glow both of complexion and spirits.she could have made an inquiry or two as to the expeditionand the expense of the irish mailsit was at her tongues endbut she abstained.
she was quite determined not to utter a wordthat should hurt jane fairfaxs feelings and they followedthe other ladies out of the room arm in arm with an appearanceof goodwill highly becoming to the beauty and grace of each.chapter xviiwhen the ladies returned to the drawingroom after dinner emma foundit hardly possible to prevent their making two distinct partieswith so much perseverance in judging and behaving ill did mrs. eltonengross jane fairfax and slight herself.
she and mrs. weston wereobliged to be almost always either talking together or silent together.mrs.
elton left them no choice.
if jane repressed her for alittle time she soon began again and though much that passedbetween them was in a halfwhisper especially on mrs. eltons sidethere was no avoiding a knowledge of their principal subjectsthe postofficecatching coldfetching lettersand friendshipwere long under discussion and to them succeeded one which mustbe at least equally unpleasant to janeinquiries whether she hadyet heard of any situation likely to suit her and professions ofmrs.
eltons meditated activity.here is april come said she i get quite anxious about you.june will soon be here.but i have never fixed on june or any other monthmerely lookedforward to the summer in general.but have you really heard of nothingi have not even made any inquiry i do not wish to make any yet.oh my dear we cannot begin too early you are not awareof the difficulty of procuring exactly the desirable thing.i not aware said jane shaking her head dear mrs. eltonwho can have thought of it as i have donebut you have not seen so much of the world as i have.
you do notknow how many candidates there always are for the first situations.i saw a vast deal of that in the neighbourhood round maple grove.a cousin of mr. suckling mrs. bragge had such an infinityof applications every body was anxious to be in her familyfor she moves in the first circle.
waxcandles in the schoolroomyou may imagine how desirable  of all houses in the kingdommrs.
bragges is the one i would most wish to see you in.colonel and mrs. campbell are to be in town again by midsummersaid jane.
i must spend some time with them i am sure they willwant itafterwards i may probably be glad to dispose of myself.but i would not wish you to take the trouble of making any inquiriesat present.trouble aye i know your scruples.
you are afraid of givingme trouble but i assure you my dear jane the campbells canhardly be more interested about you than i am.
i shall writeto mrs. partridge in a day or two and shall give her a strictcharge to be on the lookout for any thing eligible.thank you but i would rather you did not mention the subjectto her till the time draws nearer i do not wish to be givingany body trouble.but my dear child the time is drawing near here is apriland june or say even july is very near with such businessto accomplish before us.
your inexperience really amuses mea situation such as you deserve and your friends would require for youis no everyday occurrence is not obtained at a moments noticeindeed indeed we must begin inquiring directly.excuse me maam but this is by no means my intention i make noinquiry myself and should be sorry to have any made by my friends.when i am quite determined as to the time i am not at all afraidof being long unemployed.
there are places in town officeswhere inquiry would soon produce somethingoffices for the salenot quite of human fleshbut of human intellect.oh my dear human flesh  you quite shock me if you mean a flingat the slavetrade i assure you mr. suckling was always rathera friend to the abolition.i did not mean i was not thinking of the slavetrade replied janegovernesstrade i assure you was all that i had in viewwidely different certainly as to the guilt of those who carry it onbut as to the greater misery of the victims i do not know whereit lies.
but i only mean to say that there are advertising officesand that by applying to them i should have no doubt of very soonmeeting with something that would do.something that would do repeated mrs. elton.
aye that maysuit your humble ideas of yourselfi know what a modest creatureyou are but it will not satisfy your friends to have you taking upwith any thing that may offer any inferior commonplace situationin a family not moving in a certain circle or able to commandthe elegancies of life.you are very obliging but as to all that i am very indifferentit would be no object to me to be with the rich my mortificationsi think would only be the greater i should suffer more from comparison.a gentlemans family is all that i should condition for.i know you i know you you would take up with any thing but ishall be a little more nice and i am sure the good campbells willbe quite on my side with your superior talents you have a rightto move in the first circle.
your musical knowledge alone wouldentitle you to name your own terms have as many rooms as you likeand mix in the family as much as you chosethat isi do not knowif you knew the harp you might do all that i am very surebut you sing as well as playyes i really believe you mighteven without the harp stipulate for what you choseand you mustand shall be delightfully honourably and comfortably settled beforethe campbells or i have any rest.you may well class the delight the honour and the comfortof such a situation together said jane they are pretty sureto be equal however i am very serious in not wishing any thingto be attempted at present for me.
i am exceedingly obliged to youmrs.
elton i am obliged to any body who feels for me but i amquite serious in wishing nothing to be done till the summer.for two or three months longer i shall remain where i am and asi am.and i am quite serious too i assure you replied mrs. elton gailyin resolving to be always on the watch and employing my friendsto watch also that nothing really unexceptionable may pass us.in this style she ran on never thoroughly stopped by any thingtill mr. woodhouse came into the room her vanity had then a changeof object and emma heard her saying in the same halfwhisper to janehere comes this dear old beau of mine i protestonly think of hisgallantry in coming away before the other menwhat a dear creaturehe isi assure you i like him excessively.
i admire all that quaintoldfashioned politeness it is much more to my taste than modern easemodern ease often disgusts me.
but this good old mr. woodhousei wish you had heard his gallant speeches to me at dinner.
oh  i assureyou i began to think my caro sposo would be absolutely jealous.i fancy i am rather a favourite he took notice of my gown.how do you like itselinas choicehandsome i think but ido not know whether it is not overtrimmed i have the greatestdislike to the idea of being overtrimmedquite a horror of finery.i must put on a few ornaments now because it is expected of me.a bride you know must appear like a bride but my natural tasteis all for simplicity a simple style of dress is so infinitelypreferable to finery.
but i am quite in the minority i believefew people seem to value simplicity of dressshow and fineryare every thing.
i have some notion of putting such a trimmingas this to my white and silver poplin.
do you think it willlook wellthe whole party were but just reassembled in the drawingroomwhen mr. weston made his appearance among them.
he had returnedto a late dinner and walked to hartfield as soon as it was over.he had been too much expected by the best judges for surprizebut there was great joy.
mr. woodhouse was almost as glad to seehim now as he would have been sorry to see him before.
john knightleyonly was in mute astonishment.that a man who might have spenthis evening quietly at home after a day of business in londonshould set off again and walk half a mile to another mans housefor the sake of being in mixed company till bedtime of finishinghis day in the efforts of civility and the noise of numberswas a circumstance to strike him deeply.
a man who had been in motionsince eight oclock in the morning and might now have been stillwho had been long talking and might have been silent who had beenin more than one crowd and might have been alonesuch a manto quit the tranquillity and independence of his own firesideand on the evening of a cold sleety april day rush out again intothe worldcould he by a touch of his finger have instantly takenback his wife there would have been a motive but his coming wouldprobably prolong rather than break up the party.
john knightleylooked at him with amazement then shrugged his shoulders and saidi could not have believed it even of him.mr.
weston meanwhile perfectly unsuspicious of the indignationhe was exciting happy and cheerful as usual and with allthe right of being principal talker which a day spent anywherefrom home confers was making himself agreeable among the restand having satisfied the inquiries of his wife as to his dinnerconvincing her that none of all her careful directions to the servantshad been forgotten and spread abroad what public news he had heardwas proceeding to a family communication which though principallyaddressed to mrs. weston he had not the smallest doubt of beinghighly interesting to every body in the room.
he gave her a letterit was from frank and to herself he had met with it in his wayand had taken the liberty of opening it.read it read it said he it will give you pleasureonly a few lineswill not take you long read it to emma.the two ladies looked over it together and he sat smilingand talking to them the whole time in a voice a little subduedbut very audible to every body.well he is coming you see good news i think.
well what doyou say to iti always told you he would be here again soondid not ianne my dear did not i always tell you so and you wouldnot believe mein town next week you seeat the latest i dare sayfor she is as impatient as the black gentleman when any thing isto be done most likely they will be there tomorrow or saturday.as to her illness all nothing of course.
but it is an excellentthing to have frank among us again so near as town.
they will staya good while when they do come and he will be half his time with us.this is precisely what i wanted.
well pretty good news is not ithave you finished it  has emma read it all  put it up put it upwe will have a good talk about it some other time but it will notdo now.
i shall only just mention the circumstance to the others in acommon way.mrs.
weston was most comfortably pleased on the occasion.her looks and words had nothing to restrain them.
she was happyshe knew she was happy and knew she ought to be happy.her congratulations were warm and open but emma could not speakso fluently.
she was a little occupied in weighing her own feelingsand trying to understand the degree of her agitation which sherather thought was considerable.mr.
weston however too eager to be very observant too communicativeto want others to talk was very well satisfied with what she did sayand soon moved away to make the rest of his friends happy by a partialcommunication of what the whole room must have overheard already.it was well that he took every bodys joy for granted or hemight not have thought either mr. woodhouse or mr. knightleyparticularly delighted.
they were the first entitledafter mrs. weston and emma to be made happyfrom them he wouldhave proceeded to miss fairfax but she was so deep in conversationwith john knightley that it would have been too positivean interruption and finding himself close to mrs. elton andher attention disengaged he necessarily began on the subject with her.chapter xviiii hope i shall soon have the pleasure of introducing my son to yousaid mr. weston.mrs.
elton very willing to suppose a particular compliment intendedher by such a hope smiled most graciously.you have heard of a certain frank churchill i presume he continuedand know him to be my son though he does not bear my name.oh yes and i shall be very happy in his acquaintance.i am sure mr. elton will lose no time in calling on him and weshall both have great pleasure in seeing him at the vicarage.you are very obliging.frank will be extremely happy i am sure.he is to be in town next week if not sooner.
we have notice of itin a letter today.
i met the letters in my way this morningand seeing my sons hand presumed to open itthough it was not directedto meit was to mrs. weston.
she is his principal correspondenti assure you.
i hardly ever get a letter.and so you absolutely opened what was directed to her  oh  mr. westonlaughing affectedly i must protest against that.a most dangerousprecedent indeedi beg you will not let your neighbours followyour example.upon my word if this is what i am to expectwe married women must begin to exert ourselvesoh  mr. westoni could not have believed it of youaye we men are sad fellows.
you must take care of yourselfmrs.
elton.this letter tells usit is a short letterwritten ina hurry merely to give us noticeit tells us that they are allcoming up to town directly on mrs. churchills accountshe hasnot been well the whole winter and thinks enscombe too cold for herso they are all to move southward without loss of time.indeedfrom yorkshire i think.
enscombe is in yorkshireyes they are about one hundred and ninety miles from london.a considerable journey.yes upon my word very considerable.
sixtyfive miles fartherthan from maple grove to london.
but what is distance mr. westonto people of large fortuneyou would be amazed to hear how my brothermr.
suckling sometimes flies about.
you will hardly believe mebut twice in one week he and mr. bragge went to london and back againwith four horses.the evil of the distance from enscombe said mr. weston is thatmrs.
churchill as we understand has not been able to leave thesofa for a week together.
in franks last letter she complainedhe said of being too weak to get into her conservatory without havingboth his arm and his uncles this you know speaks a great degreeof weaknessbut now she is so impatient to be in town that shemeans to sleep only two nights on the road.so frank writes word.certainly delicate ladies have very extraordinary constitutionsmrs.
elton.
you must grant me that.no indeed i shall grant you nothing.
i always take the partof my own sex.
i do indeed.
i give you noticeyou will find mea formidable antagonist on that point.
i always stand up for womenand i assure you if you knew how selina feels with respectto sleeping at an inn you would not wonder at mrs. churchillsmaking incredible exertions to avoid it.
selina says it is quitehorror to herand i believe i have caught a little of her nicety.she always travels with her own sheets an excellent precaution.does mrs. churchill do the samedepend upon it mrs. churchill does every thing that any otherfine lady ever did.
mrs. churchill will not be second to any ladyin the land formrs.
elton eagerly interposed withoh  mr. weston do not mistake me.
selina is no fine ladyi assure you.
do not run away with such an idea.is not she  then she is no rule for mrs. churchill who isas thorough a fine lady as any body ever beheld.mrs.
elton began to think she had been wrong in disclaiming so warmly.it was by no means her object to have it believed that her sisterwas not a fine lady perhaps there was want of spirit in the pretenceof itand she was considering in what way she had best retractwhen mr. weston went on.mrs.
churchill is not much in my good graces as you may suspectbut this is quite between ourselves.
she is very fond of frankand therefore i would not speak ill of her.
besides she is out ofhealth now but that indeed by her own account she has always been.i would not say so to every body mrs. elton but i have not muchfaith in mrs. churchills illness.if she is really ill why not go to bath mr. westonto bathor to clifton  she has taken it into her head that enscombe is toocold for her.
the fact is i suppose that she is tired of enscombe.she has now been a longer time stationary there than she everwas before and she begins to want change.
it is a retired place.a fine place but very retired.ayelike maple grove i dare say.
nothing can stand more retired fromthe road than maple grove.
such an immense plantation all round ityou seem shut out from every thingin the most complete retirement.and mrs. churchill probably has not health or spirits like selinato enjoy that sort of seclusion.
or perhaps she may not haveresources enough in herself to be qualified for a country life.i always say a woman cannot have too many resourcesand i feelvery thankful that i have so many myself as to be quite independentof society.frank was here in february for a fortnight.so i remember to have heard.
he will find an addition to thesociety of highbury when he comes again that is if i may presumeto call myself an addition.
but perhaps he may never have heardof there being such a creature in the world.this was too loud a call for a compliment to be passed byand mr. weston with a very good grace immediately exclaimedmy dear madam  nobody but yourself could imagine such athing possible.
not heard of youi believe mrs. westonsletters lately have been full of very little else than mrs. elton.he had done his duty and could return to his son.when frank left us continued he it was quite uncertain when wemight see him again which makes this days news doubly welcome.it has been completely unexpected.
that is i always had a strongpersuasion he would be here again soon i was sure somethingfavourable would turn upbut nobody believed me.
he and mrs. westonwere both dreadfully desponding.
how could he contrive to comeand how could it be supposed that his uncle and aunt would sparehim again and so forthi always felt that something would happenin our favour and so it has you see.
i have observed mrs. eltonin the course of my life that if things are going untowardly one monththey are sure to mend the next.very true mr. weston perfectly true.
it is just what i usedto say to a certain gentleman in company in the days of courtshipwhen because things did not go quite right did not proceed with allthe rapidity which suited his feelings he was apt to be in despairand exclaim that he was sure at this rate it would be may beforehymens saffron robe would be put on for us.
oh the pains i havebeen at to dispel those gloomy ideas and give him cheerfuller viewsthe carriagewe had disappointments about the carriageone morningi remember he came to me quite in despair.she was stopped by a slight fit of coughing and mr. weston instantlyseized the opportunity of going on.you were mentioning may.
may is the very month which mrs. churchillis ordered or has ordered herself to spend in some warmer placethan enscombein short to spend in london so that we have theagreeable prospect of frequent visits from frank the whole springprecisely the season of the year which one should have chosenfor it  days almost at the longest weather genial and pleasantalways inviting one out and never too hot for exercise.
when hewas here before we made the best of it but there was a good dealof wet damp cheerless weather there always is in february you knowand we could not do half that we intended.
now will be the time.this will be complete enjoyment and i do not know mrs. eltonwhether the uncertainty of our meetings the sort of constantexpectation there will be of his coming in today or tomorrowand at any hour may not be more friendly to happiness than havinghim actually in the house.
i think it is so.
i think it is thestate of mind which gives most spirit and delight.
i hope youwill be pleased with my son but you must not expect a prodigy.he is generally thought a fine young man but do not expect a prodigy.mrs.
westons partiality for him is very great and as you may supposemost gratifying to me.
she thinks nobody equal to him.and i assure you mr. weston i have very little doubt that myopinion will be decidedly in his favour.
i have heard so muchin praise of mr. frank churchill.at the same time it is fairto observe that i am one of those who always judge for themselvesand are by no means implicitly guided by others.
i give you noticethat as i find your son so i shall judge of him.i am no flatterer.mr.
weston was musing.i hope said he presently i have not been severe upon poormrs.
churchill.
if she is ill i should be sorry to do her injusticebut there are some traits in her character which make it difficultfor me to speak of her with the forbearance i could wish.you cannot be ignorant mrs. elton of my connexion with the familynor of the treatment i have met with and between ourselvesthe whole blame of it is to be laid to her.
she was the instigator.franks mother would never have been slighted as she was but for her.mr.
churchill has pride but his pride is nothing to his wifeshis is a quiet indolent gentlemanlike sort of pride that wouldharm nobody and only make himself a little helpless and tiresomebut her pride is arrogance and insolence  and what inclines one lessto bear she has no fair pretence of family or blood.
she was nobodywhen he married her barely the daughter of a gentleman but eversince her being turned into a churchill she has outchurchilld themall in high and mighty claims  but in herself i assure you she isan upstart.only think well that must be infinitely provoking  i have quitea horror of upstarts.
maple grove has given me a thorough disgustto people of that sort for there is a family in that neighbourhoodwho are such an annoyance to my brother and sister from the airsthey give themselves  your description of mrs. churchill made methink of them directly.
people of the name of tupman very latelysettled there and encumbered with many low connexions but givingthemselves immense airs and expecting to be on a footing with the oldestablished families.
a year and a half is the very utmost that they canhave lived at west hall and how they got their fortune nobody knows.they came from birmingham which is not a place to promise muchyou know mr. weston.
one has not great hopes from birmingham.i always say there is something direful in the sound  but nothingmore is positively known of the tupmans though a good many thingsi assure you are suspected and yet by their manners they evidentlythink themselves equal even to my brother mr. suckling who happensto be one of their nearest neighbours.
it is infinitely too bad.mr.
suckling who has been eleven years a resident at maple groveand whose father had it before himi believe at leasti amalmost sure that old mr. suckling had completed the purchase beforehis death.they were interrupted.
tea was carrying round and mr. westonhaving said all that he wanted soon took the opportunity ofwalking away.after tea mr. and mrs. weston and mr. elton sat down with mr. woodhouseto cards.
the remaining five were left to their own powersand emma doubted their getting on very well for mr. knightley seemedlittle disposed for conversation mrs. elton was wanting noticewhich nobody had inclination to pay and she was herselfin a worry of spirits which would have made her prefer being silent.mr.
john knightley proved more talkative than his brother.he was to leave them early the next day and he soon began withwell emma i do not believe i have any thing more to say aboutthe boys but you have your sisters letter and every thing isdown at full length there we may be sure.
my charge would be muchmore concise than hers and probably not much in the same spiritall that i have to recommend being comprised in do not spoil themand do not physic them.i rather hope to satisfy you both said emma for i shall do allin my power to make them happy which will be enough for isabellaand happiness must preclude false indulgence and physic.and if you find them troublesome you must send them home again.that is very likely.
you think so do not youi hope i am aware that they may be too noisy for your fatheror even may be some encumbrance to you if your visiting engagementscontinue to increase as much as they have done lately.increasecertainly you must be sensible that the last halfyear has madea great difference in your way of life.difference  no indeed i am not.there can be no doubt of your being much more engaged with companythan you used to be.
witness this very time.
here am i comedown for only one day and you are engaged with a dinnerpartywhen did it happen before or any thing like it  your neighbourhoodis increasing and you mix more with it.
a little while agoevery letter to isabella brought an account of fresh gaietiesdinners at mr. coles or balls at the crown.
the differencewhich randalls randalls alone makes in your goingson is very great.yes said his brother quickly it is randalls that does it all.very welland as randalls i suppose is not likely to have lessinfluence than heretofore it strikes me as a possible thing emmathat henry and john may be sometimes in the way.
and if they arei only beg you to send them home.no cried mr. knightley that need not be the consequence.let them be sent to donwell.
i shall certainly be at leisure.upon my word exclaimed emma you amuse me  i should like to knowhow many of all my numerous engagements take place without your beingof the party and why i am to be supposed in danger of wanting leisureto attend to the little boys.
these amazing engagements of minewhat have they been  dining once with the colesand having a balltalked of which never took place.
i can understand younodding atmr.
john knightleyyour good fortune in meeting with so many ofyour friends at once here delights you too much to pass unnoticed.but you turning to mr. knightley who know how very very seldomi am ever two hours from hartfield why you should foresee such aseries of dissipation for me i cannot imagine.
and as to my dearlittle boys i must say that if aunt emma has not time for themi do not think they would fare much better with uncle knightleywho is absent from home about five hours where she is absent oneand who when he is at home is either reading to himself or settlinghis accounts.mr.
knightley seemed to be trying not to smile and succeededwithout difficulty upon mrs. eltons beginning to talk to him.volume iiichapter ia very little quiet reflection was enough to satisfy emma as to thenature of her agitation on hearing this news of frank churchill.she was soon convinced that it was not for herself she was feeling atall apprehensive or embarrassed it was for him.
her own attachmenthad really subsided into a mere nothing it was not worth thinking ofbut if he who had undoubtedly been always so much the most in loveof the two were to be returning with the same warmth of sentimentwhich he had taken away it would be very distressing.
if a separationof two months should not have cooled him there were dangers and evilsbefore hercaution for him and for herself would be necessary.she did not mean to have her own affections entangled againand it would be incumbent on her to avoid any encouragement of his.she wished she might be able to keep him from an absolute declaration.that would be so very painful a conclusion of their present acquaintanceand yet she could not help rather anticipating something decisive.she felt as if the spring would not pass without bringing a crisisan event a something to alter her present composed and tranquil state.it was not very long though rather longer than mr. weston had foreseenbefore she had the power of forming some opinion of frank churchillsfeelings.
the enscombe family were not in town quite so soon as hadbeen imagined but he was at highbury very soon afterwards.
he rodedown for a couple of hours he could not yet do more but as he camefrom randalls immediately to hartfield she could then exercise allher quick observation and speedily determine how he was influencedand how she must act.
they met with the utmost friendliness.there could be no doubt of his great pleasure in seeing her.but she had an almost instant doubt of his caring for her as hehad done of his feeling the same tenderness in the same degree.she watched him well.
it was a clear thing he was less in love than hehad been.
absence with the conviction probably of her indifferencehad produced this very natural and very desirable effect.he was in high spirits as ready to talk and laugh as ever and seemeddelighted to speak of his former visit and recur to old storiesand he was not without agitation.
it was not in his calmness thatshe read his comparative difference.
he was not calm his spiritswere evidently fluttered there was restlessness about him.lively as he was it seemed a liveliness that did not satisfy himselfbut what decided her belief on the subject was his staying only aquarter of an hour and hurrying away to make other calls in highbury.he had seen a group of old acquaintance in the street as he passedhe had not stopped he would not stop for more than a wordbut hehad the vanity to think they would be disappointed if he did not calland much as he wished to stay longer at hartfield he must hurry off.she had no doubt as to his being less in lovebut neither hisagitated spirits nor his hurrying away seemed like a perfect cureand she was rather inclined to think it implied a dread of herreturning power and a discreet resolution of not trusting himselfwith her long.this was the only visit from frank churchill in the course of ten days.he was often hoping intending to comebut was always prevented.his aunt could not bear to have him leave her.
such was his own accountat randalls.
if he were quite sincere if he really tried to comeit was to be inferred that mrs. churchills removal to london hadbeen of no service to the wilful or nervous part of her disorder.that she was really ill was very certain he had declared himselfconvinced of it at randalls.
though much might be fancy he couldnot doubt when he looked back that she was in a weaker stateof health than she had been half a year ago.
he did not believe itto proceed from any thing that care and medicine might not removeor at least that she might not have many years of existence before herbut he could not be prevailed on by all his fathers doubts to saythat her complaints were merely imaginary or that she was as strongas ever.it soon appeared that london was not the place for her.
she couldnot endure its noise.
her nerves were under continual irritationand suffering and by the ten days end her nephews letter torandalls communicated a change of plan.
they were going to removeimmediately to richmond.
mrs. churchill had been recommendedto the medical skill of an eminent person there and had otherwisea fancy for the place.
a readyfurnished house in a favouritespot was engaged and much benefit expected from the change.emma heard that frank wrote in the highest spirits of this arrangementand seemed most fully to appreciate the blessing of having twomonths before him of such near neighbourhood to many dear friendsfor the house was taken for may and june.
she was told that nowhe wrote with the greatest confidence of being often with themalmost as often as he could even wish.emma saw how mr. weston understood these joyous prospects.
he wasconsidering her as the source of all the happiness they offered.she hoped it was not so.
two months must bring it to the proof.mr.
westons own happiness was indisputable.
he was quite delighted.it was the very circumstance he could have wished for.
now it wouldbe really having frank in their neighbourhood.
what were nine milesto a young manan hours ride.
he would be always coming over.the difference in that respect of richmond and london was enoughto make the whole difference of seeing him always and seeinghim never.
sixteen milesnay eighteenit must be full eighteento manchesterstreetwas a serious obstacle.
were he ever ableto get away the day would be spent in coming and returning.there was no comfort in having him in london he might as well beat enscombe but richmond was the very distance for easy intercourse.better than nearerone good thing was immediately brought to a certainty by this removalthe ball at the crown.
it had not been forgotten before but it hadbeen soon acknowledged vain to attempt to fix a day.
now howeverit was absolutely to be every preparation was resumed and very soonafter the churchills had removed to richmond a few lines from frankto say that his aunt felt already much better for the changeand that he had no doubt of being able to join them for twentyfourhours at any given time induced them to name as early a day as possible.mr.
westons ball was to be a real thing.
a very few tomorrowsstood between the young people of highbury and happiness.mr.
woodhouse was resigned.
the time of year lightened the evilto him.
may was better for every thing than february.
mrs. bateswas engaged to spend the evening at hartfield james had due noticeand he sanguinely hoped that neither dear little henry nor dearlittle john would have any thing the matter with them while dearemma were gone.chapter iino misfortune occurred again to prevent the ball.
the day approachedthe day arrived and after a morning of some anxious watchingfrank churchill in all the certainty of his own self reached randallsbefore dinner and every thing was safe.no second meeting had there yet been between him and emma.the room at the crown was to witness itbut it would be betterthan a common meeting in a crowd.
mr. weston had been so veryearnest in his entreaties for her arriving there as soon as possibleafter themselves for the purpose of taking her opinion as to thepropriety and comfort of the rooms before any other persons camethat she could not refuse him and must therefore spend some quietinterval in the young mans company.
she was to convey harrietand they drove to the crown in good time the randalls party justsufficiently before them.frank churchill seemed to have been on the watch and thoughhe did not say much his eyes declared that he meant to havea delightful evening.
they all walked about together to seethat every thing was as it should be and within a few minuteswere joined by the contents of another carriage which emmacould not hear the sound of at first without great surprize.so unreasonably early she was going to exclaim but she presentlyfound that it was a family of old friends who were coming like herselfby particular desire to help mr. westons judgment and they wereso very closely followed by another carriage of cousins who had beenentreated to come early with the same distinguishing earnestnesson the same errand that it seemed as if half the company mightsoon be collected together for the purpose of preparatory inspection.emma perceived that her taste was not the only taste on whichmr.
weston depended and felt that to be the favourite andintimate of a man who had so many intimates and confidanteswas not the very first distinction in the scale of vanity.she liked his open manners but a little less of openheartednesswould have made him a higher character.general benevolencebut not general friendship made a man what he ought to be.she could fancy such a man.
the whole party walked aboutand looked and praised again and then having nothing else to doformed a sort of halfcircle round the fire to observe in theirvarious modes till other subjects were started that though maya fire in the evening was still very pleasant.emma found that it was not mr. westons fault that the numberof privy councillors was not yet larger.
they had stoppedat mrs. batess door to offer the use of their carriagebut the aunt and niece were to be brought by the eltons.frank was standing by her but not steadily there was a restlessnesswhich shewed a mind not at ease.
he was looking about he was goingto the door he was watching for the sound of other carriagesimpatient to begin or afraid of being always near her.mrs.
elton was spoken of.
i think she must be here soon said he.i have a great curiosity to see mrs. elton i have heard so muchof her.
it cannot be long i think before she comes.a carriage was heard.
he was on the move immediatelybut coming back saidi am forgetting that i am not acquainted with her.
i have never seeneither mr. or mrs. elton.
i have no business to put myself forward.mr.
and mrs. elton appeared and all the smiles and the proprieties passed.but miss bates and miss fairfax said mr. weston looking about.we thought you were to bring them.the mistake had been slight.
the carriage was sent for them now.emma longed to know what franks first opinion of mrs. eltonmight be how he was affected by the studied elegance of her dressand her smiles of graciousness.
he was immediately qualifyinghimself to form an opinion by giving her very proper attentionafter the introduction had passed.in a few minutes the carriage returned.somebody talked of rain.i will see that there are umbrellas sir said frank to his fathermiss bates must not be forgotten  and away he went.
mr. westonwas following but mrs. elton detained him to gratify him by heropinion of his son and so briskly did she begin that the youngman himself though by no means moving slowly could hardly be outof hearing.a very fine young man indeed mr. weston.
you know i candidly toldyou i should form my own opinion and i am happy to say that i amextremely pleased with him.you may believe me.
i never compliment.i think him a very handsome young man and his manners are preciselywhat i like and approveso truly the gentleman without the leastconceit or puppyism.
you must know i have a vast dislike to puppiesquite a horror of them.
they were never tolerated at maple grove.neither mr. suckling nor me had ever any patience with them and weused sometimes to say very cutting things  selina who is mild almostto a fault bore with them much better.while she talked of his son mr. westons attention was chainedbut when she got to maple grove he could recollect that there wereladies just arriving to be attended to and with happy smiles musthurry away.mrs.
elton turned to mrs. weston.
i have no doubt of its beingour carriage with miss bates and jane.
our coachman and horses areso extremely expeditiousi believe we drive faster than any body.what a pleasure it is to send ones carriage for a friendi understand you were so kind as to offer but another time itwill be quite unnecessary.
you may be very sure i shall alwaystake care of them.miss bates and miss fairfax escorted by the two gentlemenwalked into the room and mrs. elton seemed to think it as muchher duty as mrs. westons to receive them.
her gestures andmovements might be understood by any one who looked on like emmabut her words every bodys words were soon lost under theincessant flow of miss bates who came in talking and had notfinished her speech under many minutes after her being admittedinto the circle at the fire.
as the door opened she was heardso very obliging of youno rain at all.
nothing to signify.i do not care for myself.
quite thick shoes.
and jane declareswellas soon as she was within the door well  this is brilliantindeedthis is admirableexcellently contrived upon my word.nothing wanting.
could not have imagined it.so well lighted upjane jane lookdid you ever see any thing  oh  mr. westonyou must really have had aladdins lamp.
good mrs. stokeswould not know her own room again.
i saw her as i came inshe was standing in the entrance.
oh  mrs. stokes said ibut i had not time for more.
she was now met by mrs. weston.very well i thank you maam.
i hope you are quite well.very happy to hear it.
so afraid you might have a headacheseeing you pass by so often and knowing how much trouble you must have.delighted to hear it indeed.
ah dear mrs. elton so obligedto you for the carriageexcellent time.
jane and i quite ready.did not keep the horses a moment.
most comfortable carriage.oh and i am sure our thanks are due to you mrs. weston on that score.mrs.
elton had most kindly sent jane a note or we should have been.but two such offers in one daynever were such neighbours.i said to my mother upon my word maam.
thank you my motheris remarkably well.
gone to mr. woodhouses.
i made her takeher shawlfor the evenings are not warmher large new shawlmrs.
dixons weddingpresent.so kind of her to think of my motherbought at weymouth you knowmr.
dixons choice.
there werethree others jane says which they hesitated about some time.colonel campbell rather preferred an olive.
my dear janeare you sure you did not wet your feetit was but a drop or twobut i am so afraidbut mr. frank churchill was so extremelyand there was a mat to step uponi shall never forget hisextreme politeness.oh  mr. frank churchill i must tell youmy mothers spectacles have never been in fault since the rivetnever came out again.
my mother often talks of your goodnature.does not she janedo not we often talk of mr. frank churchillah heres miss woodhouse.dear miss woodhouse how do you dovery well i thank you quite well.
this is meeting quite in fairylandsuch a transformationmust not compliment i know eyeing emmamost complacentlythat would be rudebut upon my word miss woodhouseyou do lookhow do you like janes hairyou are a judge.she did it all herself.
quite wonderful how she does her hairno hairdresser from london i think could.ah dr. hughes i declareand mrs. hughes.
must go and speak to dr. and mrs. hughes fora moment.how do you do  how do you dovery well i thank you.this is delightful is not itwheres dear mr. richardoh there he is.
dont disturb him.
much better employed talkingto the young ladies.
how do you do mr. richardi saw you theother day as you rode through the townmrs.
otway i protestand good mr. otway and miss otway and miss caroline.such a hostof friendsand mr. george and mr. arthurhow do you do  how doyou all doquite well i am much obliged to you.
never better.dont i hear another carriagewho can this bevery likely theworthy coles.upon my word this is charming to be standing aboutamong such friends  and such a noble firei am quite roasted.no coffee i thank you for menever take coffee.a little teaif you please sir by and byeno hurryoh here it comes.every thing so goodfrank churchill returned to his station by emma and as soon as missbates was quiet she found herself necessarily overhearing thediscourse of mrs. elton and miss fairfax who were standing a littleway behind her.he was thoughtful.
whether he were overhearing tooshe could not determine.
after a good many compliments to janeon her dress and look compliments very quietly and properly takenmrs.
elton was evidently wanting to be complimented herselfand it was how do you like my gownhow do you like my trimminghow has wright done my hairwith many other relative questionsall answered with patient politeness.
mrs. elton then saidnobody can think less of dress in general than i dobut upon suchan occasion as this when every bodys eyes are so much upon meand in compliment to the westonswho i have no doubt are givingthis ball chiefly to do me honouri would not wish to be inferiorto others.
and i see very few pearls in the room except mine.so frank churchill is a capital dancer i understand.we shall seeif our styles suit.a fine young man certainly is frank churchill.i like him very well.at this moment frank began talking so vigorously that emma couldnot but imagine he had overheard his own praises and did not wantto hear moreand the voices of the ladies were drowned for a whiletill another suspension brought mrs. eltons tones again distinctlyforward.mr.
elton had just joined them and his wife was exclaimingoh you have found us out at last have you in our seclusioni was this moment telling jane i thought you would begin to beimpatient for tidings of us.janerepeated frank churchill with a look of surprize and displeasure.that is easybut miss fairfax does not disapprove it i suppose.how do you like mrs. elton said emma in a whisper.not at all.you are ungrateful.ungratefulwhat do you mean  then changing from a frown toa smileno do not tell mei do not want to know what you mean.where is my fatherwhen are we to begin dancingemma could hardly understand him he seemed in an odd humour.he walked off to find his father but was quickly back again with bothmr.
and mrs. weston.
he had met with them in a little perplexitywhich must be laid before emma.
it had just occurred to mrs. westonthat mrs. elton must be asked to begin the ball that she wouldexpect it which interfered with all their wishes of giving emmathat distinction.emma heard the sad truth with fortitude.and what are we to do for a proper partner for her said mr. weston.she will think frank ought to ask her.frank turned instantly to emma to claim her former promiseand boasted himself an engaged man which his father looked his mostperfect approbation ofand it then appeared that mrs. weston waswanting him to dance with mrs. elton himself and that their businesswas to help to persuade him into it which was done pretty soon.mr.
weston and mrs. elton led the way mr. frank churchill and misswoodhouse followed.
emma must submit to stand second to mrs. eltonthough she had always considered the ball as peculiarly for her.it was almost enough to make her think of marrying.
mrs. elton hadundoubtedly the advantage at this time in vanity completely gratifiedfor though she had intended to begin with frank churchill she couldnot lose by the change.
mr. weston might be his sons superior.in spite of this little rub however emma was smiling with enjoymentdelighted to see the respectable length of the set as it was formingand to feel that she had so many hours of unusual festivity before her.she was more disturbed by mr. knightleys not dancing than by anything else.there he was among the standersby where he ought notto be he ought to be dancingnot classing himself with the husbandsand fathers and whistplayers who were pretending to feel an interestin the dance till their rubbers were made upso young as he lookedhe could not have appeared to greater advantage perhaps anywherethan where he had placed himself.
his tall firm upright figureamong the bulky forms and stooping shoulders of the elderly menwas such as emma felt must draw every bodys eyes and excepting herown partner there was not one among the whole row of young menwho could be compared with him.he moved a few steps nearerand those few steps were enough to prove in how gentlemanlikea manner with what natural grace he must have danced would hebut take the trouble.whenever she caught his eye she forced himto smile but in general he was looking grave.
she wished he couldlove a ballroom better and could like frank churchill better.he seemed often observing her.
she must not flatter herself that hethought of her dancing but if he were criticising her behaviourshe did not feel afraid.
there was nothing like flirtation betweenher and her partner.
they seemed more like cheerful easy friendsthan lovers.
that frank churchill thought less of her than he had donewas indubitable.the ball proceeded pleasantly.
the anxious cares the incessantattentions of mrs. weston were not thrown away.
every bodyseemed happy and the praise of being a delightful ballwhich is seldom bestowed till after a ball has ceased to bewas repeatedly given in the very beginning of the existence of this.of very important very recordable events it was not more productivethan such meetings usually are.
there was one however which emmathought something of.the two last dances before supper were begunand harriet had no partnerthe only young lady sitting downand so equal had been hitherto the number of dancers that how therecould be any one disengaged was the wonderbut emmas wonderlessened soon afterwards on seeing mr. elton sauntering about.he would not ask harriet to dance if it were possible to be avoidedshe was sure he would notand she was expecting him every moment toescape into the cardroom.escape however was not his plan.
he came to the part of the roomwhere the sittersby were collected spoke to some and walked aboutin front of them as if to shew his liberty and his resolutionof maintaining it.
he did not omit being sometimes directlybefore miss smith or speaking to those who were close to her.emma saw it.
she was not yet dancing she was working her wayup from the bottom and had therefore leisure to look aroundand by only turning her head a little she saw it all.
when she washalfway up the set the whole group were exactly behind her and shewould no longer allow her eyes to watch but mr. elton was so nearthat she heard every syllable of a dialogue which just then tookplace between him and mrs. weston and she perceived that his wifewho was standing immediately above her was not only listening alsobut even encouraging him by significant glances.the kindheartedgentle mrs. weston had left her seat to join him and say do notyou dance mr. elton to which his prompt reply was most readilymrs.
weston if you will dance with me.meoh noi would get you a better partner than myself.i am no dancer.if mrs. gilbert wishes to dance said he i shall have great pleasurei am surefor though beginning to feel myself rather an old married manand that my dancing days are over it would give me very greatpleasure at any time to stand up with an old friend like mrs. gilbert.mrs.
gilbert does not mean to dance but there is a young ladydisengaged whom i should be very glad to see dancingmiss smith.miss smithohi had not observed.you are extremely obligingand if i were not an old married man.but my dancing days are overmrs.
weston.
you will excuse me.
any thing else i should be most happyto do at your commandbut my dancing days are over.mrs.
weston said no more and emma could imagine with whatsurprize and mortification she must be returning to her seat.this was mr. elton the amiable obliging gentle mr. elton.she looked round for a moment he had joined mr. knightley at alittle distance and was arranging himself for settled conversationwhile smiles of high glee passed between him and his wife.she would not look again.
her heart was in a glow and she fearedher face might be as hot.in another moment a happier sight caught hermr.
knightleyleading harriet to the setnever had she been more surprizedseldom more delighted than at that instant.
she was all pleasureand gratitude both for harriet and herself and longed to bethanking him and though too distant for speech her countenancesaid much as soon as she could catch his eye again.his dancing proved to be just what she had believed itextremely good and harriet would have seemed almost too luckyif it had not been for the cruel state of things before and forthe very complete enjoyment and very high sense of the distinctionwhich her happy features announced.
it was not thrown away on hershe bounded higher than ever flew farther down the middleand was in a continual course of smiles.mr.
elton had retreated into the cardroom looking emma trustedvery foolish.
she did not think he was quite so hardened as his wifethough growing very like hershe spoke some of her feelingsby observing audibly to her partnerknightley has taken pity on poor little miss smithvery goodnaturedi declare.supper was announced.
the move began and miss bates might beheard from that moment without interruption till her beingseated at table and taking up her spoon.jane jane my dear jane where are youhere is your tippet.mrs.
weston begs you to put on your tippet.
she says she is afraidthere will be draughts in the passage though every thing hasbeen doneone door nailed upquantities of mattingmy dear janeindeed you must.
mr. churchill oh you are too obliginghow well you put it onso gratified  excellent dancing indeedyes my dear i ran home as i said i should to help grandmamato bed and got back again and nobody missed me.i set off withoutsaying a word just as i told you.
grandmama was quite wellhad a charming evening with mr. woodhouse a vast deal of chatand backgammon.tea was made downstairs biscuits and baked applesand wine before she came away  amazing luck in some of her throwsand she inquired a great deal about you how you were amusedand who were your partners.
oh said i i shall not forestall janei left her dancing with mr. george otway she will love to tell youall about it herself tomorrow her first partner was mr. eltoni do not know who will ask her next perhaps mr. william cox.my dear sir you are too obliging.is there nobody you wouldnot ratheri am not helpless.
sir you are most kind.
upon my wordjane on one arm and me on the otherstop stop let us standa little back mrs. elton is going dear mrs. elton how elegantshe looksbeautiful lacenow we all follow in her train.quite the queen of the eveningwell here we are at the passage.two steps jane take care of the two steps.
oh no there isbut one.
well i was persuaded there were two.
how very oddi was convinced there were two and there is but one.
i never saw anything equal to the comfort and stylecandles everywhere.i was tellingyou of your grandmama janethere was a little disappointment.the baked apples and biscuits excellent in their way you knowbut there was a delicate fricassee of sweetbread and some asparagusbrought in at first and good mr. woodhouse not thinking theasparagus quite boiled enough sent it all out again.
now thereis nothing grandmama loves better than sweetbread and asparagusso she was rather disappointed but we agreed we would not speak of itto any body for fear of its getting round to dear miss woodhousewho would be so very much concernedwell this is brillianti am all amazement could not have supposed any thingsuchelegance and profusioni have seen nothing like it sincewell where shall we sit where shall we sit  anywhere so thatjane is not in a draught.
where i sit is of no consequence.oh do you recommend this sidewell i am sure mr. churchillonly it seems too goodbut just as you please.
what you directin this house cannot be wrong.
dear jane how shall we everrecollect half the dishes for grandmama  soup too  bless mei should not be helped so soon but it smells most excellent and icannot help beginning.emma had no opportunity of speaking to mr. knightley tillafter supper but when they were all in the ballroom againher eyes invited him irresistibly to come to her and be thanked.he was warm in his reprobation of mr. eltons conduct it had beenunpardonable rudeness and mrs. eltons looks also received the dueshare of censure.they aimed at wounding more than harriet said he.
emma whyis it that they are your enemieshe looked with smiling penetration and on receivingno answer added she ought not to be angry with you i suspectwhatever he may be.to that surmise you say nothing of coursebut confess emma that you did want him to marry harriet.i did replied emma and they cannot forgive me.he shook his head but there was a smile of indulgence with itand he only saidi shall not scold you.
i leave you to your own reflections.can you trust me with such flatterersdoes my vain spirit evertell me i am wrongnot your vain spirit but your serious spirit.if one leadsyou wrong i am sure the other tells you of it.i do own myself to have been completely mistaken in mr. elton.there is a littleness about him which you discovered and which idid not  and i was fully convinced of his being in love with harriet.it was through a series of strange blundersand in return for your acknowledging so much i will do you the justiceto say that you would have chosen for him better than he has chosen forhimself.harriet smith has some firstrate qualities which mrs. eltonis totally without.
an unpretending singleminded artless girlinfinitely to be preferred by any man of sense and taste to sucha woman as mrs. elton.
i found harriet more conversable than i expected.emma was extremely gratified.they were interrupted by the bustleof mr. weston calling on every body to begin dancing again.come miss woodhouse miss otway miss fairfax what are you all doingcome emma set your companions the example.
every body is lazyevery body is asleepi am ready said emma whenever i am wanted.whom are you going to dance with asked mr. knightley.she hesitated a moment and then replied with you if you willask me.will you said he offering his hand.indeed i will.
you have shewn that you can dance and you know weare not really so much brother and sister as to make it at all improper.brother and sister no indeed.chapter iiithis little explanation with mr. knightley gave emma considerablepleasure.
it was one of the agreeable recollections of the ballwhich she walked about the lawn the next morning to enjoy.she wasextremely glad that they had come to so good an understanding respectingthe eltons and that their opinions of both husband and wife were somuch alike and his praise of harriet his concession in her favourwas peculiarly gratifying.
the impertinence of the eltons which fora few minutes had threatened to ruin the rest of her evening had beenthe occasion of some of its highest satisfactions and she lookedforward to another happy resultthe cure of harriets infatuation.from harriets manner of speaking of the circumstance before theyquitted the ballroom she had strong hopes.
it seemed as if her eyeswere suddenly opened and she were enabled to see that mr. eltonwas not the superior creature she had believed him.
the feverwas over and emma could harbour little fear of the pulse beingquickened again by injurious courtesy.
she depended on the evilfeelings of the eltons for supplying all the discipline of pointedneglect that could be farther requisite.harriet rationalfrank churchill not too much in love and mr. knightley notwanting to quarrel with her how very happy a summer must be before hershe was not to see frank churchill this morning.
he had toldher that he could not allow himself the pleasure of stoppingat hartfield as he was to be at home by the middle of the day.she did not regret it.having arranged all these matters looked them through and put them allto rights she was just turning to the house with spirits freshened upfor the demands of the two little boys as well as of their grandpapawhen the great iron sweepgate opened and two persons enteredwhom she had never less expected to see togetherfrank churchillwith harriet leaning on his armactually harrieta momentsufficed to convince her that something extraordinary had happened.harriet looked white and frightened and he was trying to cheer her.the iron gates and the frontdoor were not twenty yards asunderthey were all three soon in the hall and harriet immediately sinkinginto a chair fainted away.a young lady who faints must be recovered questions must be answeredand surprizes be explained.
such events are very interestingbut the suspense of them cannot last long.
a few minutes made emmaacquainted with the whole.miss smith and miss bickerton another parlour boarder atmrs.
goddards who had been also at the ball had walked out togetherand taken a road the richmond road which though apparently publicenough for safety had led them into alarm.about half a milebeyond highbury making a sudden turn and deeply shaded by elmson each side it became for a considerable stretch very retiredand when the young ladies had advanced some way into itthey had suddenly perceived at a small distance before themon a broader patch of greensward by the side a party of gipsies.a child on the watch came towards them to beg and miss bickertonexcessively frightened gave a great scream and calling on harrietto follow her ran up a steep bank cleared a slight hedge at the topand made the best of her way by a short cut back to highbury.but poor harriet could not follow.
she had suffered very muchfrom cramp after dancing and her first attempt to mount the bankbrought on such a return of it as made her absolutely powerlessand in this state and exceedingly terrified she had been obligedto remain.how the trampers might have behaved had the young ladies beenmore courageous must be doubtful but such an invitation for attackcould not be resisted and harriet was soon assailed by half adozen children headed by a stout woman and a great boy all clamorousand impertinent in look though not absolutely in word.more andmore frightened she immediately promised them money and taking outher purse gave them a shilling and begged them not to want moreor to use her ill.she was then able to walk though but slowlyand was moving awaybut her terror and her purse were too temptingand she was followed or rather surrounded by the whole gangdemanding more.in this state frank churchill had found her she tremblingand conditioning they loud and insolent.
by a most fortunatechance his leaving highbury had been delayed so as to bring himto her assistance at this critical moment.
the pleasantnessof the morning had induced him to walk forward and leave hishorses to meet him by another road a mile or two beyond highburyand happening to have borrowed a pair of scissors the night beforeof miss bates and to have forgotten to restore them he hadbeen obliged to stop at her door and go in for a few minuteshe was therefore later than he had intended and being on footwas unseen by the whole party till almost close to them.the terror which the woman and boy had been creating in harrietwas then their own portion.
he had left them completely frightenedand harriet eagerly clinging to him and hardly able to speakhad just strength enough to reach hartfield before her spiritswere quite overcome.
it was his idea to bring her to hartfieldhe had thought of no other place.this was the amount of the whole storyof his communication andof harriets as soon as she had recovered her senses and speech.he dared not stay longer than to see her well these several delaysleft him not another minute to lose and emma engaging to giveassurance of her safety to mrs. goddard and notice of therebeing such a set of people in the neighbourhood to mr. knightleyhe set off with all the grateful blessings that she could utterfor her friend and herself.such an adventure as thisa fine young man and a lovely youngwoman thrown together in such a way could hardly fail of suggestingcertain ideas to the coldest heart and the steadiest brain.so emma thought at least.
could a linguist could a grammariancould even a mathematician have seen what she did have witnessed theirappearance together and heard their history of it without feelingthat circumstances had been at work to make them peculiarly interestingto each otherhow much more must an imaginist like herselfbe on fire with speculation and foresightespecially with sucha groundwork of anticipation as her mind had already made.it was a very extraordinary thing  nothing of the sort had everoccurred before to any young ladies in the place within her memoryno rencontre no alarm of the kindand now it had happenedto the very person and at the very hour when the other veryperson was chancing to pass by to rescue herit certainlywas very extraordinaryand knowing as she did the favourablestate of mind of each at this period it struck her the more.he was wishing to get the better of his attachment to herselfshe just recovering from her mania for mr. elton.
it seemed as ifevery thing united to promise the most interesting consequences.it was not possible that the occurrence should not be stronglyrecommending each to the other.in the few minutes conversation which she had yet had with himwhile harriet had been partially insensible he had spoken of her terrorher naivete her fervour as she seized and clung to his arm with asensibility amused and delighted and just at last after harrietsown account had been given he had expressed his indignationat the abominable folly of miss bickerton in the warmest terms.every thing was to take its natural course however neither impellednor assisted.
she would not stir a step nor drop a hint.no she had had enough of interference.
there could be no harmin a scheme a mere passive scheme.
it was no more than a wish.beyond it she would on no account proceed.emmas first resolution was to keep her father from the knowledgeof what had passedaware of the anxiety and alarm it would occasionbut she soon felt that concealment must be impossible.
within halfan hour it was known all over highbury.
it was the very eventto engage those who talk most the young and the low and allthe youth and servants in the place were soon in the happiness offrightful news.
the last nights ball seemed lost in the gipsies.poor mr. woodhouse trembled as he sat and as emma had foreseenwould scarcely be satisfied without their promising never to gobeyond the shrubbery again.
it was some comfort to him that manyinquiries after himself and miss woodhouse for his neighboursknew that he loved to be inquired after as well as miss smithwere coming in during the rest of the day and he had the pleasureof returning for answer that they were all very indifferentwhich though not exactly true for she was perfectly welland harriet not much otherwise emma would not interfere with.she had an unhappy state of health in general for the child of sucha man for she hardly knew what indisposition was and if he did notinvent illnesses for her she could make no figure in a message.the gipsies did not wait for the operations of justice they tookthemselves off in a hurry.
the young ladies of highbury might havewalked again in safety before their panic began and the wholehistory dwindled soon into a matter of little importance but to emmaand her nephewsin her imagination it maintained its groundand henry and john were still asking every day for the story ofharriet and the gipsies and still tenaciously setting her rightif she varied in the slightest particular from the original recital.chapter iva very few days had passed after this adventure when harriet cameone morning to emma with a small parcel in her hand and aftersitting down and hesitating thus beganmiss woodhouseif you are at leisurei have something that ishould like to tell youa sort of confession to makeand thenyou know it will be over.emma was a good deal surprized but begged her to speak.there was a seriousness in harriets manner which prepared herquite as much as her words for something more than ordinary.it is my duty and i am sure it is my wish she continuedto have no reserves with you on this subject.
as i am happilyquite an altered creature in one respect it is very fit that youshould have the satisfaction of knowing it.
i do not want to saymore than is necessaryi am too much ashamed of having given wayas i have done and i dare say you understand me.yes said emma i hope i do.how i could so long a time be fancying myself .
.
.cried harriet warmly.
it seems like madness  i can see nothingat all extraordinary in him now.i do not care whether i meethim or notexcept that of the two i had rather not see himand indeed i would go any distance round to avoid himbut i donot envy his wife in the least i neither admire her nor envy heras i have done  she is very charming i dare say and all thatbut i think her very illtempered and disagreeablei shall never forgether look the other nighthowever i assure you miss woodhousei wish her no evil.no let them be ever so happy togetherit will not give me another moments pang  and to convince youthat i have been speaking truth i am now going to destroywhat iought to have destroyed long agowhat i ought never to have kepti know that very well blushing as she spoke.however now iwill destroy it alland it is my particular wish to do itin your presence that you may see how rational i am grown.cannot you guess what this parcel holds said she with a conscious look.not the least in the world.did he ever give you any thingnoi cannot call them gifts but they are things that i havevalued very much.she held the parcel towards her and emma read the words mostprecious treasures on the top.
her curiosity was greatly excited.harriet unfolded the parcel and she looked on with impatience.within abundance of silver paper was a pretty little tunbridgeware boxwhich harriet opened  it was well lined with the softest cottonbut excepting the cotton emma saw only a small piece of courtplaister.now said harriet you must recollect.no indeed i do not.dear me  i should not have thought it possible you could forgetwhat passed in this very room about courtplaister one of the verylast times we ever met in itit was but a very few days before ihad my sore throatjust before mr. and mrs. john knightley camei think the very evening.do not you remember his cutting his fingerwith your new penknife and your recommending courtplaisterbut as you had none about you and knew i had you desiredme to supply him and so i took mine out and cut him a piecebut it was a great deal too large and he cut it smaller and keptplaying some time with what was left before he gave it back to me.and so then in my nonsense i could not help making a treasure of itso i put it by never to be used and looked at it now and thenas a great treat.my dearest harriet cried emma putting her hand before her faceand jumping up you make me more ashamed of myself than i can bear.remember it  aye i remember it all now all except your savingthis relici knew nothing of that till this momentbut the cuttingthe finger and my recommending courtplaister and saying i had noneabout meoh my sins my sinsand i had plenty all the while inmy pocketone of my senseless tricksi deserve to be under acontinual blush all the rest of my life.wellsitting down againgo onwhat elseand had you really some at hand yourself  i am sure i neversuspected it you did it so naturally.and so you actually put this piece of courtplaister by for his sakesaid emma recovering from her state of shame and feeling dividedbetween wonder and amusement.
and secretly she added to herselflord bless me when should i ever have thought of putting by in cottona piece of courtplaister that frank churchill had been pulling abouti never was equal to this.here resumed harriet turning to her box again here issomething still more valuable i mean that has been more valuablebecause this is what did really once belong to him which thecourtplaister never did.emma was quite eager to see this superior treasure.
it was the endof an old pencilthe part without any lead.this was really his said harriet.do not you rememberone morningno i dare say you do not.
but one morningi forgetexactly the daybut perhaps it was the tuesday or wednesday beforethat evening he wanted to make a memorandum in his pocketbookit was about sprucebeer.
mr. knightley had been telling himsomething about brewing sprucebeer and he wanted to put it downbut when he took out his pencil there was so little lead that hesoon cut it all away and it would not do so you lent him anotherand this was left upon the table as good for nothing.
but i keptmy eye on it and as soon as i dared caught it up and neverparted with it again from that moment.i do remember it cried emma i perfectly remember it.talking about sprucebeer.oh yesmr.
knightley and i both saying weliked it and mr. eltons seeming resolved to learn to like it too.i perfectly remember it.stop mr. knightley was standing just herewas not he  i have an idea he was standing just here.ah  i do not know.
i cannot recollect.it is very oddbut i cannot recollect.mr.
elton was sitting here i remembermuch about where i am now.well go on.oh thats all.
i have nothing more to shew you or to sayexcept that i am now going to throw them both behind the fireand i wish you to see me do it.my poor dear harriet and have you actually found happinessin treasuring up these thingsyes simpleton as i wasbut i am quite ashamed of it now and wishi could forget as easily as i can burn them.
it was very wrongof me you know to keep any remembrances after he was married.i knew it wasbut had not resolution enough to part with them.but harriet is it necessary to burn the courtplaisteri havenot a word to say for the bit of old pencil but the courtplaistermight be useful.i shall be happier to burn it replied harriet.
it hasa disagreeable look to me.
i must get rid of every thing.there it goes and there is an end thank heaven of mr. elton.and when thought emma will there be a beginning of mr. churchillshe had soon afterwards reason to believe that the beginning wasalready made and could not but hope that the gipsy though she hadtold no fortune might be proved to have made harriets.about afortnight after the alarm they came to a sufficient explanationand quite undesignedly.
emma was not thinking of it at the momentwhich made the information she received more valuable.she merely said in the course of some trivial chat well harrietwhenever you marry i would advise you to do so and soand thoughtno more of it till after a minutes silence she heard harrietsay in a very serious tone i shall never marry.emma then looked up and immediately saw how it was and after amoments debate as to whether it should pass unnoticed or not repliednever marrythis is a new resolution.it is one that i shall never change however.after another short hesitation i hope it does not proceed fromi hope it is not in compliment to mr. eltonmr.
elton indeed cried harriet indignantly.oh noand emmacould just catch the words so superior to mr. eltonshe then took a longer time for consideration.
should she proceedno farthershould she let it pass and seem to suspect nothingperhaps harriet might think her cold or angry if she didor perhaps if she were totally silent it might only driveharriet into asking her to hear too much and against any thinglike such an unreserve as had been such an open and frequentdiscussion of hopes and chances she was perfectly resolved.she believed it would be wiser for her to say and know at onceall that she meant to say and know.
plain dealing was always best.she had previously determined how far she would proceedon any application of the sort and it would be safer for bothto have the judicious law of her own brain laid down with speed.she was decided and thus spokeharriet i will not affect to be in doubt of your meaning.your resolution or rather your expectation of never marryingresults from an idea that the person whom you might preferwould be too greatly your superior in situation to think of you.is not it sooh  miss woodhouse believe me i have not the presumption to supposeindeed i am not so mad.but it is a pleasure to me to admire himat a distanceand to think of his infinite superiority to allthe rest of the world with the gratitude wonder and venerationwhich are so proper in me especially.i am not at all surprized at you harriet.
the service he renderedyou was enough to warm your heart.service oh it was such an inexpressible obligationthe very recollection of it and all that i felt at the timewhen i saw him cominghis noble lookand my wretchedness before.such a change  in one moment such a change  from perfect miseryto perfect happinessit is very natural.
it is natural and it is honourable.yes honourable i think to chuse so well and so gratefully.but that it will be a fortunate preference is more that i can promise.i do not advise you to give way to it harriet.
i do not by anymeans engage for its being returned.
consider what you are about.perhaps it will be wisest in you to check your feelings while you canat any rate do not let them carry you far unless you are persuadedof his liking you.
be observant of him.
let his behaviour be theguide of your sensations.
i give you this caution now because ishall never speak to you again on the subject.
i am determinedagainst all interference.
henceforward i know nothing of the matter.let no name ever pass our lips.
we were very wrong beforewe will be cautious now.he is your superior no doubt and theredo seem objections and obstacles of a very serious naturebut yet harriet more wonderful things have taken place there havebeen matches of greater disparity.
but take care of yourself.i would not have you too sanguine though however it may endbe assured your raising your thoughts to him is a mark of good tastewhich i shall always know how to value.harriet kissed her hand in silent and submissive gratitude.emma was very decided in thinking such an attachment no bad thingfor her friend.
its tendency would be to raise and refine her mindand it must be saving her from the danger of degradation.chapter vin this state of schemes and hopes and connivance june openedupon hartfield.
to highbury in general it brought no material change.the eltons were still talking of a visit from the sucklingsand of the use to be made of their barouchelandau and jane fairfaxwas still at her grandmothers and as the return of the campbellsfrom ireland was again delayed and august instead of midsummerfixed for it she was likely to remain there full two months longerprovided at least she were able to defeat mrs. eltons activityin her service and save herself from being hurried into a delightfulsituation against her will.mr.
knightley who for some reason best known to himself had certainlytaken an early dislike to frank churchill was only growing to dislikehim more.
he began to suspect him of some double dealing in hispursuit of emma.
that emma was his object appeared indisputable.every thing declared it his own attentions his fathers hintshis motherinlaws guarded silence it was all in unisonwords conduct discretion and indiscretion told the same story.but while so many were devoting him to emma and emma herself making himover to harriet mr. knightley began to suspect him of some inclinationto trifle with jane fairfax.
he could not understand it but therewere symptoms of intelligence between themhe thought so at leastsymptoms of admiration on his side which having once observedhe could not persuade himself to think entirely void of meaninghowever he might wish to escape any of emmas errors of imagination.she was not present when the suspicion first arose.
he was diningwith the randalls family and jane at the eltons and he hadseen a look more than a single look at miss fairfax whichfrom the admirer of miss woodhouse seemed somewhat out of place.when he was again in their company he could not help rememberingwhat he had seen nor could he avoid observations which unless itwere like cowper and his fire at twilightmyself creating what i sawbrought him yet stronger suspicion of there being a somethingof private liking of private understanding even between frankchurchill and jane.he had walked up one day after dinner as he very often didto spend his evening at hartfield.
emma and harriet were goingto walk he joined them and on returning they fell in with alarger party who like themselves judged it wisest to take theirexercise early as the weather threatened rain mr. and mrs. westonand their son miss bates and her niece who had accidentally met.they all united and on reaching hartfield gates emma who knew itwas exactly the sort of visiting that would be welcome to her fatherpressed them all to go in and drink tea with him.
the randallsparty agreed to it immediately and after a pretty long speechfrom miss bates which few persons listened to she also found itpossible to accept dear miss woodhouses most obliging invitation.as they were turning into the grounds mr. perry passed by on horseback.the gentlemen spoke of his horse.by the bye said frank churchill to mrs. weston presentlywhat became of mr. perrys plan of setting up his carriagemrs.
weston looked surprized and said i did not know that heever had any such plan.nay i had it from you.
you wrote me word of it three months ago.me impossibleindeed you did.
i remember it perfectly.
you mentioned it aswhat was certainly to be very soon.
mrs. perry had told somebodyand was extremely happy about it.
it was owing to her persuasionas she thought his being out in bad weather did him a great dealof harm.
you must remember it nowupon my word i never heard of it till this moment.never really neverbless me how could it bethen i musthave dreamt itbut i was completely persuadedmiss smithyou walk as if you were tired.
you will not be sorry to findyourself at home.what is thiswhat is this cried mr. weston about perryand a carriage  is perry going to set up his carriage franki am glad he can afford it.
you had it from himself had youno sir replied his son laughing i seem to have had itfrom nobody.very oddi really was persuaded of mrs. westonshaving mentioned it in one of her letters to enscombe many weeks agowith all these particularsbut as she declares she never hearda syllable of it before of course it must have been a dream.
i ama great dreamer.
i dream of every body at highbury when i am awayand when i have gone through my particular friends then i begindreaming of mr. and mrs. perry.it is odd though observed his father that you should have had sucha regular connected dream about people whom it was not very likely youshould be thinking of at enscombe.
perrys setting up his carriageand his wifes persuading him to it out of care for his healthjust what will happen i have no doubt some time or otheronly a little premature.
what an air of probability sometimesruns through a dream  and at others what a heap of absurditiesit is  well frank your dream certainly shews that highbury is inyour thoughts when you are absent.
emma you are a great dreameri thinkemma was out of hearing.
she had hurried on before her gueststo prepare her father for their appearance and was beyond the reachof mr. westons hint.why to own the truth cried miss bates who had been trying in vainto be heard the last two minutes if i must speak on this subjectthere is no denying that mr. frank churchill might havei do notmean to say that he did not dream iti am sure i have sometimesthe oddest dreams in the worldbut if i am questioned about iti must acknowledge that there was such an idea last springfor mrs. perry herself mentioned it to my mother and the colesknew of it as well as ourselvesbut it was quite a secretknown to nobody else and only thought of about three days.mrs.
perry was very anxious that he should have a carriage and cameto my mother in great spirits one morning because she thought shehad prevailed.
jane dont you remember grandmamas telling usof it when we got home  i forget where we had been walking tovery likely to randalls yes i think it was to randalls.mrs.
perry was always particularly fond of my motherindeed i donot know who is notand she had mentioned it to her in confidenceshe had no objection to her telling us of course but it was notto go beyond  and from that day to this i never mentioned itto a soul that i know of.
at the same time i will not positivelyanswer for my having never dropt a hint because i know i dosometimes pop out a thing before i am aware.
i am a talkeryou know i am rather a talker and now and then i have let a thingescape me which i should not.
i am not like jane i wish i were.i will answer for it she never betrayed the least thing in the world.where is sheoh just behind.
perfectly remember mrs. perrys coming.extraordinary dream indeedthey were entering the hall.
mr. knightleys eyes had precededmiss batess in a glance at jane.
from frank churchills facewhere he thought he saw confusion suppressed or laughed awayhe had involuntarily turned to hers but she was indeed behindand too busy with her shawl.
mr. weston had walked in.
the twoother gentlemen waited at the door to let her pass.
mr. knightleysuspected in frank churchill the determination of catching her eyehe seemed watching her intentlyin vain however if it were sojane passed between them into the hall and looked at neither.there was no time for farther remark or explanation.
the dream mustbe borne with and mr. knightley must take his seat with the rest roundthe large modern circular table which emma had introduced at hartfieldand which none but emma could have had power to place there andpersuade her father to use instead of the smallsized pembrokeon which two of his daily meals had for forty years been crowded.tea passed pleasantly and nobody seemed in a hurry to move.miss woodhouse said frank churchill after examining a tablebehind him which he could reach as he sat have your nephews takenaway their alphabetstheir box of letters  it used to stand here.where is it  this is a sort of dulllooking evening that oughtto be treated rather as winter than summer.
we had great amusementwith those letters one morning.
i want to puzzle you again.emma was pleased with the thought and producing the box the tablewas quickly scattered over with alphabets which no one seemed so muchdisposed to employ as their two selves.
they were rapidly formingwords for each other or for any body else who would be puzzled.the quietness of the game made it particularly eligible formr.
woodhouse who had often been distressed by the more animated sortwhich mr. weston had occasionally introduced and who now sat happilyoccupied in lamenting with tender melancholy over the departureof the poor little boys or in fondly pointing out as he tookup any stray letter near him how beautifully emma had written it.frank churchill placed a word before miss fairfax.
she gavea slight glance round the table and applied herself to it.frank was next to emma jane opposite to themand mr. knightleyso placed as to see them all and it was his object to see as muchas he could with as little apparent observation.
the wordwas discovered and with a faint smile pushed away.
if meantto be immediately mixed with the others and buried from sightshe should have looked on the table instead of looking just acrossfor it was not mixed and harriet eager after every fresh wordand finding out none directly took it up and fell to work.she was sitting by mr. knightley and turned to him for help.the word was blunder and as harriet exultingly proclaimed itthere was a blush on janes cheek which gave it a meaning nototherwise ostensible.
mr. knightley connected it with the dreambut how it could all be was beyond his comprehension.how the delicacy the discretion of his favourite could have beenso lain asleep  he feared there must be some decided involvement.disingenuousness and double dealing seemed to meet him at every turn.these letters were but the vehicle for gallantry and trick.it was a childs play chosen to conceal a deeper game on frankchurchills part.with great indignation did he continue to observe him with greatalarm and distrust to observe also his two blinded companions.he saw a short word prepared for emma and given to her with a looksly and demure.
he saw that emma had soon made it out and foundit highly entertaining though it was something which she judged itproper to appear to censure for she said nonsense for shamehe heard frank churchill next say with a glance towards janei will give it to hershall iand as clearly heard emmaopposing it with eager laughing warmth.
no no you must notyou shall not indeed.it was done however.
this gallant young man who seemed to lovewithout feeling and to recommend himself without complaisancedirectly handed over the word to miss fairfax and with a particulardegree of sedate civility entreated her to study it.
mr. knightleysexcessive curiosity to know what this word might be made him seizeevery possible moment for darting his eye towards it and it wasnot long before he saw it to be dixon.
jane fairfaxs perceptionseemed to accompany his her comprehension was certainly more equalto the covert meaning the superior intelligence of those five lettersso arranged.
she was evidently displeased looked up and seeingherself watched blushed more deeply than he had ever perceived herand saying only i did not know that proper names were allowedpushed away the letters with even an angry spirit and lookedresolved to be engaged by no other word that could be offered.her face was averted from those who had made the attack and turnedtowards her aunt.aye very true my dear cried the latter though jane had notspoken a wordi was just going to say the same thing.
it is timefor us to be going indeed.
the evening is closing in and grandmamawill be looking for us.
my dear sir you are too obliging.we really must wish you good night.janes alertness in moving proved her as ready as her aunthad preconceived.
she was immediately up and wanting to quitthe table but so many were also moving that she could not get awayand mr. knightley thought he saw another collection of letters anxiouslypushed towards her and resolutely swept away by her unexamined.she was afterwards looking for her shawlfrank churchill waslooking alsoit was growing dusk and the room was in confusionand how they parted mr. knightley could not tell.he remained at hartfield after all the rest his thoughts fullof what he had seen so full that when the candles came to assisthis observations he mustyes he certainly must as a friendan anxious friendgive emma some hint ask her some question.he could not see her in a situation of such danger without trying topreserve her.
it was his duty.pray emma said he may i ask in what lay the great amusementthe poignant sting of the last word given to you and miss fairfaxi saw the word and am curious to know how it could be so veryentertaining to the one and so very distressing to the other.emma was extremely confused.
she could not endure to give him thetrue explanation for though her suspicions were by no means removedshe was really ashamed of having ever imparted them.oh she cried in evident embarrassment it all meant nothinga mere joke among ourselves.the joke he replied gravely seemed confined to youand mr. churchill.he had hoped she would speak again but she did not.
she wouldrather busy herself about any thing than speak.
he sat a littlewhile in doubt.
a variety of evils crossed his mind.
interferencefruitless interference.
emmas confusion and the acknowledged intimacyseemed to declare her affection engaged.
yet he would speak.he owed it to her to risk any thing that might be involved inan unwelcome interference rather than her welfare to encounterany thing rather than the remembrance of neglect in such a cause.my dear emma said he at last with earnest kindness do youthink you perfectly understand the degree of acquaintance betweenthe gentleman and lady we have been speaking ofbetween mr. frank churchill and miss fairfax  oh yes perfectly.why do you make a doubt of ithave you never at any time had reason to think that he admired heror that she admired himnever never she cried with a most open eagernessnever forthe twentieth part of a moment did such an idea occur to me.and how could it possibly come into your headi have lately imagined that i saw symptoms of attachment between themcertain expressive looks which i did not believe meant to be public.oh you amuse me excessively.
i am delighted to find that youcan vouchsafe to let your imagination wanderbut it will not dovery sorry to check you in your first essaybut indeed it willnot do.
there is no admiration between them i do assure youand the appearances which have caught you have arisen from somepeculiar circumstancesfeelings rather of a totally different natureit is impossible exactly to explainthere is a good deal ofnonsense in itbut the part which is capable of being communicatedwhich is sense is that they are as far from any attachment oradmiration for one another as any two beings in the world can be.that is i presume it to be so on her side and i can answer for itsbeing so on his.
i will answer for the gentlemans indifference.she spoke with a confidence which staggered with a satisfactionwhich silenced mr. knightley.
she was in gay spirits and wouldhave prolonged the conversation wanting to hear the particularsof his suspicions every look described and all the wheres and howsof a circumstance which highly entertained her  but his gaiety didnot meet hers.
he found he could not be useful and his feelingswere too much irritated for talking.
that he might not be irritatedinto an absolute fever by the fire which mr. woodhouses tenderhabits required almost every evening throughout the year he soonafterwards took a hasty leave and walked home to the coolnessand solitude of donwell abbey.chapter viafter being long fed with hopes of a speedy visit from mr. andmrs.
suckling the highbury world were obliged to endure the mortificationof hearing that they could not possibly come till the autumn.no such importation of novelties could enrich their intellectual storesat present.
in the daily interchange of news they must be againrestricted to the other topics with which for a while the sucklingscoming had been united such as the last accounts of mrs. churchillwhose health seemed every day to supply a different reportand the situation of mrs. weston whose happiness it was to be hopedmight eventually be as much increased by the arrival of a childas that of all her neighbours was by the approach of it.mrs.
elton was very much disappointed.
it was the delay of a greatdeal of pleasure and parade.
her introductions and recommendationsmust all wait and every projected party be still only talked of.so she thought at firstbut a little consideration convincedher that every thing need not be put off.
why should not theyexplore to box hill though the sucklings did not come  they couldgo there again with them in the autumn.
it was settled that theyshould go to box hill.
that there was to be such a party had beenlong generally known  it had even given the idea of another.emma had never been to box hill she wished to see what every bodyfound so well worth seeing and she and mr. weston had agreedto chuse some fine morning and drive thither.
two or three moreof the chosen only were to be admitted to join them and it was tobe done in a quiet unpretending elegant way infinitely superiorto the bustle and preparation the regular eating and drinkingand picnic parade of the eltons and the sucklings.this was so very well understood between them that emma couldnot but feel some surprise and a little displeasure on hearingfrom mr. weston that he had been proposing to mrs. elton as herbrother and sister had failed her that the two parties should uniteand go together and that as mrs. elton had very readily accededto it so it was to be if she had no objection.
now as herobjection was nothing but her very great dislike of mrs. eltonof which mr. weston must already be perfectly aware it was not worthbringing forward againit could not be done without a reproofto him which would be giving pain to his wife and she foundherself therefore obliged to consent to an arrangement which shewould have done a great deal to avoid an arrangement which wouldprobably expose her even to the degradation of being said to be ofmrs.
eltons party  every feeling was offended and the forbearanceof her outward submission left a heavy arrear due of secret severityin her reflections on the unmanageable goodwill of mr. westons temper.i am glad you approve of what i have done said he very comfortably.but i thought you would.
such schemes as these are nothingwithout numbers.
one cannot have too large a party.
a large partysecures its own amusement.
and she is a goodnatured woman after all.one could not leave her out.emma denied none of it aloud and agreed to none of it in private.it was now the middle of june and the weather fine and mrs. eltonwas growing impatient to name the day and settle with mr. westonas to pigeonpies and cold lamb when a lame carriagehorse threwevery thing into sad uncertainty.
it might be weeks it might beonly a few days before the horse were useable but no preparationscould be ventured on and it was all melancholy stagnation.mrs.
eltons resources were inadequate to such an attack.is not this most vexations knightley she cried.and such weatherfor exploringthese delays and disappointments are quite odious.what are we to dothe year will wear away at this rateand nothing done.
before this time last year i assure you we hadhad a delightful exploring party from maple grove to kings weston.you had better explore to donwell replied mr. knightley.that may be done without horses.
come and eat my strawberries.they are ripening fast.if mr. knightley did not begin seriously he was obliged to proceed sofor his proposal was caught at with delight and the oh  i shouldlike it of all things was not plainer in words than manner.donwell was famous for its strawberrybeds which seemed a plea forthe invitation  but no plea was necessary cabbagebeds would havebeen enough to tempt the lady who only wanted to be going somewhere.she promised him again and again to comemuch oftener thanhe doubtedand was extremely gratified by such a proof of intimacysuch a distinguishing compliment as she chose to consider it.you may depend upon me said she.
i certainly will come.name your day and i will come.
you will allow me to bringjane fairfaxi cannot name a day said he till i have spoken to some otherswhom i would wish to meet you.oh leave all that to me.
only give me a carteblanche.i amlady patroness you know.
it is my party.
i will bring friendswith me.i hope you will bring elton said he  but i will not troubleyou to give any other invitations.oh now you are looking very sly.
but consideryou need not be afraidof delegating power to me.
i am no young lady on her preferment.married women you know may be safely authorised.
it is my party.leave it all to me.
i will invite your guests.nohe calmly repliedthere is but one married woman in the worldwhom i can ever allow to invite what guests she pleases to donwelland that one ismrs.
weston i suppose interrupted mrs. elton rather mortified.nomrs.
knightleyand till she is in being i will managesuch matters myself.ah you are an odd creature she cried satisfied to have noone preferred to herself.you are a humourist and may say whatyou like.
quite a humourist.
well i shall bring jane with mejane and her aunt.the rest i leave to you.
i have no objectionsat all to meeting the hartfield family.
dont scruple.
i knowyou are attached to them.you certainly will meet them if i can prevail and i shall callon miss bates in my way home.thats quite unnecessary i see jane every daybut as you like.it is to be a morning scheme you know knightley quite a simple thing.i shall wear a large bonnet and bring one of my little basketshanging on my arm.
hereprobably this basket with pink ribbon.nothing can be more simple you see.
and jane will have such another.there is to be no form or paradea sort of gipsy party.
we areto walk about your gardens and gather the strawberries ourselvesand sit under treesand whatever else you may like to provideit is to be all out of doorsa table spread in the shade you know.every thing as natural and simple as possible.
is not that your ideanot quite.
my idea of the simple and the natural will be to havethe table spread in the diningroom.
the nature and the simplicityof gentlemen and ladies with their servants and furniture i thinkis best observed by meals within doors.
when you are tired of eatingstrawberries in the garden there shall be cold meat in the house.wellas you please only dont have a great set out.
and by the byecan i or my housekeeper be of any use to you with our opinionpray be sincere knightley.
if you wish me to talk to mrs. hodgesor to inspect anythingi have not the least wish for it i thank you.wellbut if any difficulties should arise my housekeeperis extremely clever.i will answer for it that mine thinks herself full as cleverand would spurn any bodys assistance.i wish we had a donkey.
the thing would be for us all to comeon donkeys jane miss bates and meand my caro sposo walking by.i really must talk to him about purchasing a donkey.
in a countrylife i conceive it to be a sort of necessary for let a woman haveever so many resources it is not possible for her to be always shutup at homeand very long walks you knowin summer there is dustand in winter there is dirt.you will not find either between donwell and highbury.donwell lane is never dusty and now it is perfectly dry.
come ona donkey however if you prefer it.
you can borrow mrs. coles.i would wish every thing to be as much to your taste as possible.that i am sure you would.
indeed i do you justice my good friend.under that peculiar sort of dry blunt manner i know you have thewarmest heart.
as i tell mr. e. you are a thorough humourist.yes believe me knightley i am fully sensible of your attentionto me in the whole of this scheme.
you have hit upon the very thingto please me.mr.
knightley had another reason for avoiding a table in the shade.he wished to persuade mr. woodhouse as well as emma to join the partyand he knew that to have any of them sitting down out of doorsto eat would inevitably make him ill.  mr. woodhouse must notunder the specious pretence of a morning drive and an hour or twospent at donwell be tempted away to his misery.he was invited on good faith.
no lurking horrors were to upbraidhim for his easy credulity.
he did consent.
he had not beenat donwell for two years.
some very fine morning he and emmaand harriet could go very well and he could sit still withmrs.
weston while the dear girls walked about the gardens.he did not suppose they could be damp now in the middle ofthe day.
he should like to see the old house again exceedinglyand should be very happy to meet mr. and mrs. elton and any otherof his neighbours.he could not see any objection at all to hisand emmas and harriets going there some very fine morning.he thought it very well done of mr. knightley to invite themvery kind and sensiblemuch cleverer than dining out.he was notfond of dining out.mr.
knightley was fortunate in every bodys most ready concurrence.the invitation was everywhere so well received that it seemed as iflike mrs. elton they were all taking the scheme as a particularcompliment to themselves.emma and harriet professed very highexpectations of pleasure from it and mr. weston unaskedpromised to get frank over to join them if possible a proofof approbation and gratitude which could have been dispensed with.mr.
knightley was then obliged to say that he should be gladto see him and mr. weston engaged to lose no time in writingand spare no arguments to induce him to come.in the meanwhile the lame horse recovered so fast that the partyto box hill was again under happy consideration and at last donwellwas settled for one day and box hill for the nextthe weatherappearing exactly right.under a bright midday sun at almost midsummer mr. woodhousewas safely conveyed in his carriage with one window downto partake of this alfresco party and in one of the mostcomfortable rooms in the abbey especially prepared for him by afire all the morning he was happily placed quite at his easeready to talk with pleasure of what had been achieved and adviseevery body to come and sit down and not to heat themselves.mrs.
weston who seemed to have walked there on purpose to be tiredand sit all the time with him remained when all the otherswere invited or persuaded out his patient listener and sympathiser.it was so long since emma had been at the abbey that as soon as shewas satisfied of her fathers comfort she was glad to leave himand look around her eager to refresh and correct her memory withmore particular observation more exact understanding of a houseand grounds which must ever be so interesting to her and all her family.she felt all the honest pride and complacency which her alliancewith the present and future proprietor could fairly warrantas she viewed the respectable size and style of the buildingits suitable becoming characteristic situation low and shelteredits ample gardens stretching down to meadows washed by a streamof which the abbey with all the old neglect of prospecthad scarcely a sightand its abundance of timber in rows and avenueswhich neither fashion nor extravagance had rooted up.the housewas larger than hartfield and totally unlike it covering a gooddeal of ground rambling and irregular with many comfortableand one or two handsome rooms.it was just what it ought to beand it looked what it wasand emma felt an increasing respectfor it as the residence of a family of such true gentilityuntainted in blood and understanding.some faults of temper johnknightley had but isabella had connected herself unexceptionably.she had given them neither men nor names nor places that couldraise a blush.
these were pleasant feelings and she walked aboutand indulged them till it was necessary to do as the others didand collect round the strawberrybeds.the whole party were assembledexcepting frank churchill who was expected every moment from richmondand mrs. elton in all her apparatus of happiness her large bonnetand her basket was very ready to lead the way in gatheringaccepting or talkingstrawberries and only strawberriescould now be thought or spoken of.the best fruit in englandevery bodys favouritealways wholesome.these the finest bedsand finest sorts.delightful to gather for ones selfthe only wayof really enjoying them.morning decidedly the best timenever tiredevery sort goodhautboy infinitely superiorno comparisonthe others hardly eatablehautboys very scarcechili preferredwhite wood finest flavour of allprice of strawberries in londonabundance about bristolmaple grovecultivationbeds when tobe renewedgardeners thinking exactly differentno general rulegardeners never to be put out of their waydelicious fruitonly too rich to be eaten much ofinferior to cherriescurrants more refreshingonly objection to gathering strawberriesthe stoopingglaring suntired to deathcould bear it no longermust go and sit in the shade.such for half an hour was the conversationinterrupted onlyonce by mrs. weston who came out in her solicitude after hersoninlaw to inquire if he were comeand she was a little uneasy.she had some fears of his horse.seats tolerably in the shade were found and now emma was obligedto overhear what mrs. elton and jane fairfax were talking of.a situation a most desirable situation was in question.
mrs. eltonhad received notice of it that morning and was in raptures.it was not with mrs. suckling it was not with mrs. braggebut in felicity and splendour it fell short only of them  it waswith a cousin of mrs. bragge an acquaintance of mrs. sucklinga lady known at maple grove.
delightful charming superiorfirst circles spheres lines ranks every thingand mrs. eltonwas wild to have the offer closed with immediately.on her sideall was warmth energy and triumphand she positively refusedto take her friends negative though miss fairfax continuedto assure her that she would not at present engage in any thingrepeating the same motives which she had been heard to urge before.still mrs. elton insisted on being authorised to write an acquiescenceby the morrows post.how jane could bear it at all was astonishingto emma.she did look vexed she did speak pointedlyand at lastwith a decision of action unusual to her proposed a removal.should not they walk  would not mr. knightley shew them the gardensall the gardensshe wished to see the whole extent.the pertinacityof her friend seemed more than she could bear.it was hot and after walking some time over the gardens in a scattereddispersed way scarcely any three together they insensiblyfollowed one another to the delicious shade of a broad shortavenue of limes which stretching beyond the garden at an equaldistance from the river seemed the finish of the pleasure grounds.it led to nothing nothing but a view at the end over a low stonewall with high pillars which seemed intended in their erectionto give the appearance of an approach to the house which never hadbeen there.
disputable however as might be the taste of sucha termination it was in itself a charming walk and the viewwhich closed it extremely pretty.the considerable slope at nearlythe foot of which the abbey stood gradually acquired a steeperform beyond its grounds and at half a mile distant was a bankof considerable abruptness and grandeur well clothed with woodand at the bottom of this bank favourably placed and shelteredrose the abbey mill farm with meadows in front and the rivermaking a close and handsome curve around it.it was a sweet viewsweet to the eye and the mind.
english verdureenglish culture english comfort seen under a sun brightwithout being oppressive.in this walk emma and mr. weston found all the others assembledand towards this view she immediately perceived mr. knightleyand harriet distinct from the rest quietly leading the way.mr.
knightley and harrietit was an odd teteatete but she wasglad to see it.there had been a time when he would have scornedher as a companion and turned from her with little ceremony.now they seemed in pleasant conversation.
there had been a timealso when emma would have been sorry to see harriet in a spotso favourable for the abbey mill farm but now she feared it not.it might be safely viewed with all its appendages of prosperityand beauty its rich pastures spreading flocks orchard in blossomand light column of smoke ascending.she joined them at the walland found them more engaged in talking than in looking around.he was giving harriet information as to modes of agriculture etc.and emma received a smile which seemed to say these are myown concerns.
i have a right to talk on such subjects without beingsuspected of introducing robert martin.she did not suspect him.it was too old a story.robert martin had probably ceased to thinkof harriet.they took a few turns together along the walk.the shadewas most refreshing and emma found it the pleasantest part ofthe day.the next remove was to the house they must all go in and eatand they were all seated and busy and still frank churchill didnot come.
mrs. weston looked and looked in vain.
his father wouldnot own himself uneasy and laughed at her fears but she couldnot be cured of wishing that he would part with his black mare.he had expressed himself as to coming with more than common certainty.his aunt was so much better that he had not a doubt of gettingover to them.mrs.
churchills state however as many were readyto remind her was liable to such sudden variation as might disappointher nephew in the most reasonable dependenceand mrs. westonwas at last persuaded to believe or to say that it must beby some attack of mrs. churchill that he was prevented coming.emma looked at harriet while the point was under considerationshe behaved very well and betrayed no emotion.the cold repast was over and the party were to go out once moreto see what had not yet been seen the old abbey fishpondsperhaps get as far as the clover which was to be begun cuttingon the morrow or at any rate have the pleasure of being hotand growing cool again.mr.
woodhouse who had already takenhis little round in the highest part of the gardens where nodamps from the river were imagined even by him stirred no moreand his daughter resolved to remain with him that mrs. westonmight be persuaded away by her husband to the exercise and varietywhich her spirits seemed to need.mr.
knightley had done all in his power for mr. woodhousesentertainment.
books of engravings drawers of medals cameoscorals shells and every other family collection within his cabinetshad been prepared for his old friend to while away the morningand the kindness had perfectly answered.
mr. woodhouse had beenexceedingly well amused.
mrs. weston had been shewing them all to himand now he would shew them all to emmafortunate in having no otherresemblance to a child than in a total want of taste for what he sawfor he was slow constant and methodical.before this second lookingover was begun however emma walked into the hall for the sakeof a few moments free observation of the entrance and groundplotof the houseand was hardly there when jane fairfax appearedcoming quickly in from the garden and with a look of escape.little expecting to meet miss woodhouse so soon there was a startat first but miss woodhouse was the very person she was in quest of.will you be so kind said she when i am missed as to saythat i am gone homei am going this moment.my aunt is not awarehow late it is nor how long we have been absentbut i am sure weshall be wanted and i am determined to go directly.i have saidnothing about it to any body.
it would only be giving troubleand distress.
some are gone to the ponds and some to the lime walk.till they all come in i shall not be missed and when they dowill you have the goodness to say that i am gonecertainly if you wish itbut you are not going to walkto highbury aloneyeswhat should hurt mei walk fast.
i shall be at homein twenty minutes.but it is too far indeed it is to be walking quite alone.let my fathers servant go with you.let me order the carriage.it can be round in five minutes.thank you thank youbut on no account.i would rather walk.and for me to be afraid of walking alonei who may so soon haveto guard othersshe spoke with great agitation and emma very feelingly repliedthat can be no reason for your being exposed to danger now.i must order the carriage.
the heat even would be danger.you arefatigued already.i amshe answeredi am fatigued but it is not the sortof fatiguequick walking will refresh me.miss woodhouse we allknow at times what it is to be wearied in spirits.
mine i confessare exhausted.
the greatest kindness you can shew me will be to letme have my own way and only say that i am gone when it is necessary.emma had not another word to oppose.
she saw it all and enteringinto her feelings promoted her quitting the house immediatelyand watched her safely off with the zeal of a friend.
her partinglook was gratefuland her parting words oh  miss woodhousethe comfort of being sometimes aloneseemed to burst froman overcharged heart and to describe somewhat of the continualendurance to be practised by her even towards some of those wholoved her best.such a home indeed such an aunt said emma as she turned backinto the hall again.
i do pity you.
and the more sensibilityyou betray of their just horrors the more i shall like you.jane had not been gone a quarter of an hour and they had onlyaccomplished some views of st. marks place venice when frankchurchill entered the room.
emma had not been thinking of himshe had forgotten to think of himbut she was very glad to see him.mrs.
weston would be at ease.
the black mare was blamelessthey were right who had named mrs. churchill as the cause.he had been detained by a temporary increase of illness in hera nervous seizure which had lasted some hoursand he had quite givenup every thought of coming till very lateand had he known how hota ride he should have and how late with all his hurry he must behe believed he should not have come at all.
the heat was excessivehe had never suffered any thing like italmost wished he had staidat homenothing killed him like heathe could bear any degree of coldetc.
but heat was intolerableand he sat down at the greatestpossible distance from the slight remains of mr. woodhouses firelooking very deplorable.you will soon be cooler if you sit still said emma.as soon as i am cooler i shall go back again.
i could veryill be sparedbut such a point had been made of my comingyou will all be going soon i suppose the whole party breaking up.i met one as i camemadness in such weatherabsolute madnessemma listened and looked and soon perceived that frank churchillsstate might be best defined by the expressive phrase of beingout of humour.
some people were always cross when they were hot.such might be his constitution and as she knew that eatingand drinking were often the cure of such incidental complaintsshe recommended his taking some refreshment he would find abundanceof every thing in the diningroomand she humanely pointed outthe door.nohe should not eat.
he was not hungry it would only makehim hotter.
in two minutes however he relented in his own favourand muttering something about sprucebeer walked off.
emma returnedall her attention to her father saying in secreti am glad i have done being in love with him.
i should not like aman who is so soon discomposed by a hot morning.
harriets sweeteasy temper will not mind it.he was gone long enough to have had a very comfortable meal and cameback all the bettergrown quite cooland with good mannerslike himselfable to draw a chair close to them take an interestin their employment and regret in a reasonable way that heshould be so late.
he was not in his best spirits but seemedtrying to improve them and at last made himself talk nonsensevery agreeably.
they were looking over views in swisserland.as soon as my aunt gets well i shall go abroad said he.i shall never be easy till i have seen some of these places.you will have my sketches some time or other to look ator my tourto reador my poem.
i shall do something to expose myself.that may bebut not by sketches in swisserland.
you willnever go to swisserland.
your uncle and aunt will never allowyou to leave england.they may be induced to go too.
a warm climate may be prescribedfor her.
i have more than half an expectation of our all going abroad.i assure you i have.
i feel a strong persuasion this morningthat i shall soon be abroad.
i ought to travel.
i am tiredof doing nothing.
i want a change.
i am serious miss woodhousewhatever your penetrating eyes may fancyi am sick of englandand would leave it tomorrow if i could.you are sick of prosperity and indulgence.
cannot you inventa few hardships for yourself and be contented to stayi sick of prosperity and indulgence  you are quite mistaken.i do not look upon myself as either prosperous or indulged.
i amthwarted in every thing material.
i do not consider myself at alla fortunate person.you are not quite so miserable though as when you first came.go and eat and drink a little more and you will do very well.another slice of cold meat another draught of madeira and waterwill make you nearly on a par with the rest of us.noi shall not stir.
i shall sit by you.
you are my best cure.we are going to box hill tomorrowyou will join us.it is not swisserland but it will be something for a youngman so much in want of a change.
you will stay and go with usno certainly not i shall go home in the cool of the evening.but you may come again in the cool of tomorrow morning.noit will not be worth while.
if i come i shall be cross.then pray stay at richmond.but if i do i shall be crosser still.
i can never bear to thinkof you all there without me.these are difficulties which you must settle for yourself.chuse your own degree of crossness.
i shall press you no more.the rest of the party were now returning and all were soon collected.with some there was great joy at the sight of frank churchillothers took it very composedly but there was a very general distressand disturbance on miss fairfaxs disappearance being explained.that it was time for every body to go concluded the subject and witha short final arrangement for the next days scheme they parted.frank churchills little inclination to exclude himself increasedso much that his last words to emma werewellif you wish me to stay and join the party i will.she smiled her acceptance and nothing less than a summons fromrichmond was to take him back before the following evening.chapter viithey had a very fine day for box hill and all the other outwardcircumstances of arrangement accommodation and punctualitywere in favour of a pleasant party.
mr. weston directed the wholeofficiating safely between hartfield and the vicarage and everybody was in good time.
emma and harriet went together miss batesand her niece with the eltons the gentlemen on horseback.mrs.
weston remained with mr. woodhouse.
nothing was wantingbut to be happy when they got there.
seven miles were travelledin expectation of enjoyment and every body had a burst of admirationon first arriving but in the general amount of the day therewas deficiency.
there was a languor a want of spirits a want of unionwhich could not be got over.
they separated too much into parties.the eltons walked together mr. knightley took charge of missbates and jane and emma and harriet belonged to frank churchill.and mr. weston tried in vain to make them harmonise better.
it seemedat first an accidental division but it never materially varied.mr.
and mrs. elton indeed shewed no unwillingness to mixand be as agreeable as they could but during the two whole hoursthat were spent on the hill there seemed a principle of separationbetween the other parties too strong for any fine prospects or anycold collation or any cheerful mr. weston to remove.at first it was downright dulness to emma.
she had never seen frankchurchill so silent and stupid.
he said nothing worth hearinglooked without seeingadmired without intelligencelistened withoutknowing what she said.
while he was so dull it was no wonder thatharriet should be dull likewise and they were both insufferable.when they all sat down it was better to her taste a great deal betterfor frank churchill grew talkative and gay making her his first object.every distinguishing attention that could be paid was paid to her.to amuse her and be agreeable in her eyes seemed all that hecared forand emma glad to be enlivened not sorry to be flatteredwas gay and easy too and gave him all the friendly encouragementthe admission to be gallant which she had ever given in the firstand most animating period of their acquaintance but which nowin her own estimation meant nothing though in the judgment of mostpeople looking on it must have had such an appearance as no englishword but flirtation could very well describe.
mr. frank churchilland miss woodhouse flirted together excessively.
they were layingthemselves open to that very phraseand to having it sent offin a letter to maple grove by one lady to ireland by another.not that emma was gay and thoughtless from any real felicityit was rather because she felt less happy than she had expected.she laughed because she was disappointed and though she liked himfor his attentions and thought them all whether in friendshipadmiration or playfulness extremely judicious they were not winningback her heart.
she still intended him for her friend.how much i am obliged to you said he for telling me to come todayif it had not been for you i should certainly have lost all thehappiness of this party.
i had quite determined to go away again.yes you were very cross and i do not know what aboutexcept that you were too late for the best strawberries.i was a kinder friend than you deserved.
but you were humble.you begged hard to be commanded to come.dont say i was cross.
i was fatigued.
the heat overcame me.it is hotter today.not to my feelings.
i am perfectly comfortable today.you are comfortable because you are under command.your commandyes.perhaps i intended you to say so but i meant selfcommand.
you hadsomehow or other broken bounds yesterday and run away from yourown management but today you are got back againand as i cannotbe always with you it is best to believe your temper under yourown command rather than mine.it comes to the same thing.
i can have no selfcommand withouta motive.
you order me whether you speak or not.
and you canbe always with me.
you are always with me.dating from three oclock yesterday.
my perpetual influencecould not begin earlier or you would not have been so muchout of humour before.three oclock yesterday  that is your date.
i thought i had seenyou first in february.your gallantry is really unanswerable.
but lowering her voicenobody speaks except ourselves and it is rather too much to betalking nonsense for the entertainment of seven silent people.i say nothing of which i am ashamed replied he with lively impudence.i saw you first in february.
let every body on the hill hear me ifthey can.
let my accents swell to mickleham on one side and dorkingon the other.
i saw you first in february.
and then whisperingour companions are excessively stupid.
what shall we do to rouse themany nonsense will serve.
they shall talk.
ladies and gentlemeni am ordered by miss woodhouse who wherever she is presidesto say that she desires to know what you are all thinking ofsome laughed and answered goodhumouredly.
miss bates said a great dealmrs.
elton swelled at the idea of miss woodhouses presidingmr.
knightleys answer was the most distinct.is miss woodhouse sure that she would like to hear what we areall thinking ofoh no nocried emma laughing as carelessly as she couldupon no account in the world.
it is the very last thing iwould stand the brunt of just now.
let me hear any thing ratherthan what you are all thinking of.
i will not say quite all.there are one or two perhaps glancing at mr. weston and harrietwhose thoughts i might not be afraid of knowing.it is a sort of thing cried mrs. elton emphaticallywhich i should not have thought myself privileged toinquire into.
though perhaps as the chaperon of the partyi never was in any circleexploring partiesyoung ladiesmarried womenher mutterings were chiefly to her husband and he murmuredin replyvery true my love very true.
exactly so indeedquite unheard ofbut some ladies say any thing.
better pass it off as a joke.every body knows what is due to you.it will not do whispered frank to emma they are mostof them affronted.
i will attack them with more address.ladies and gentlemeni am ordered by miss woodhouse to say that shewaives her right of knowing exactly what you may all be thinking ofand only requires something very entertaining from each of youin a general way.
here are seven of you besides myself who sheis pleased to say am very entertaining already and she onlydemands from each of you either one thing very clever be it proseor verse original or repeatedor two things moderately cleveror three things very dull indeed and she engages to laugh heartilyat them all.oh very well exclaimed miss bates then i need not be uneasy.three things very dull indeed.
that will just do for me you know.i shall be sure to say three dull things as soon as ever i openmy mouth shant i looking round with the most goodhumoureddependence on every bodys assentdo not you all think i shallemma could not resist.ah maam but there may be a difficulty.
pardon mebut youwill be limited as to numberonly three at once.miss bates deceived by the mock ceremony of her manner did notimmediately catch her meaning but when it burst on her it couldnot anger though a slight blush shewed that it could pain her.ahwellto be sure.
yes i see what she means turning tomr.
knightley and i will try to hold my tongue.
i must makemyself very disagreeable or she would not have said such a thingto an old friend.i like your plan cried mr. weston.
agreed agreed.
i will domy best.
i am making a conundrum.
how will a conundrum reckonlow i am afraid sir very low answered his sonbut we shallbe indulgentespecially to any one who leads the way.no no said emma it will not reckon low.
a conundrum ofmr.
westons shall clear him and his next neighbour.
come sirpray let me hear it.i doubt its being very clever myself said mr. weston.it is too much a matter of fact but here it is.what two lettersof the alphabet are there that express perfectionwhat two lettersexpress perfection  i am sure i do not know.ah you will never guess.
you to emma i am certain willnever guess.i will tell you.m.
and a.emma.do you understandunderstanding and gratification came together.
it might be a veryindifferent piece of wit but emma found a great deal to laughat and enjoy in itand so did frank and harriet.it did not seemto touch the rest of the party equally some looked very stupidabout it and mr. knightley gravely saidthis explains the sort of clever thing that is wanted and mr. westonhas done very well for himself but he must have knocked up everybody else.
perfection should not have come quite so soon.oh for myself i protest i must be excused said mrs. eltoni really cannot attempti am not at all fond of the sort of thing.i had an acrostic once sent to me upon my own name which i was notat all pleased with.
i knew who it came from.
an abominable puppyyou know who i mean nodding to her husband.
these kind of thingsare very well at christmas when one is sitting round the firebut quite out of place in my opinion when one is exploringabout the country in summer.
miss woodhouse must excuse me.i am not one of those who have witty things at every bodys service.i do not pretend to be a wit.
i have a great deal of vivacityin my own way but i really must be allowed to judge when to speakand when to hold my tongue.
pass us if you please mr. churchill.pass mr. e. knightley jane and myself.
we have nothing clever to saynot one of us.yes yes pray pass me added her husband with a sort ofsneering consciousness i have nothing to say that can entertainmiss woodhouse or any other young lady.
an old married manquite good for nothing.
shall we walk augustawith all my heart.
i am really tired of exploring so longon one spot.
come jane take my other arm.jane declined it however and the husband and wife walked off.happy couple said frank churchill as soon as they were outof hearinghow well they suit one anothervery luckymarrying asthey did upon an acquaintance formed only in a public placethey onlyknew each other i think a few weeks in bath  peculiarly luckyfor as to any real knowledge of a persons disposition that bathor any public place can giveit is all nothing there can beno knowledge.
it is only by seeing women in their own homesamong their own set just as they always are that you can formany just judgment.
short of that it is all guess and luckand will generally be illluck.
how many a man has committed himselfon a short acquaintance and rued it all the rest of his lifemiss fairfax who had seldom spoken before except among herown confederates spoke now.such things do occur undoubtedly.she was stopped by a cough.frank churchill turned towards her to listen.you were speaking said he gravely.
she recovered her voice.i was only going to observe that though such unfortunate circumstancesdo sometimes occur both to men and women i cannot imagine themto be very frequent.
a hasty and imprudent attachment may arisebut there is generally time to recover from it afterwards.
i wouldbe understood to mean that it can be only weak irresolute characterswhose happiness must be always at the mercy of chancewho will suffer an unfortunate acquaintance to be an inconveniencean oppression for ever.he made no answer merely looked and bowed in submission and soonafterwards said in a lively tonewell i have so little confidence in my own judgment that wheneveri marry i hope some body will chuse my wife for me.
will youturning to emma.
will you chuse a wife for mei am sure ishould like any body fixed on by you.
you provide for the familyyou know with a smile at his father.
find some body for me.i am in no hurry.
adopt her educate her.and make her like myself.by all means if you can.very well.
i undertake the commission.
you shall have a charming wife.she must be very lively and have hazle eyes.
i care for nothing else.i shall go abroad for a couple of yearsand when i returni shall come to you for my wife.
remember.emma was in no danger of forgetting.
it was a commission to touch everyfavourite feeling.
would not harriet be the very creature describedhazle eyes excepted two years more might make her all that he wished.he might even have harriet in his thoughts at the momentwho could say  referring the education to her seemed to imply it.now maam said jane to her aunt shall we join mrs. eltonif you please my dear.
with all my heart.
i am quite ready.i was ready to have gone with her but this will do just as well.we shall soon overtake her.
there she isno thats somebody else.thats one of the ladies in the irish car party not at all like her.well i declarethey walked off followed in half a minute by mr. knightley.mr.
weston his son emma and harriet only remained and the youngmans spirits now rose to a pitch almost unpleasant.
even emma grewtired at last of flattery and merriment and wished herself ratherwalking quietly about with any of the others or sitting almost aloneand quite unattended to in tranquil observation of the beautifulviews beneath her.
the appearance of the servants looking outfor them to give notice of the carriages was a joyful sightand even the bustle of collecting and preparing to departand the solicitude of mrs. elton to have her carriage firstwere gladly endured in the prospect of the quiet drive home which wasto close the very questionable enjoyments of this day of pleasure.such another scheme composed of so many illassorted peopleshe hoped never to be betrayed into again.while waiting for the carriage she found mr. knightley by her side.he looked around as if to see that no one were near and then saidemma i must once more speak to you as i have been used to doa privilege rather endured than allowed perhaps but i must stilluse it.
i cannot see you acting wrong without a remonstrance.how could you be so unfeeling to miss bates  how could you be soinsolent in your wit to a woman of her character age and situationemma i had not thought it possible.emma recollected blushed was sorry but tried to laugh it off.nay how could i help saying what i didnobody could have helped it.it was not so very bad.
i dare say she did not understand me.i assure you she did.
she felt your full meaning.
she has talkedof it since.
i wish you could have heard how she talked of itwith what candour and generosity.
i wish you could have heard herhonouring your forbearance in being able to pay her such attentionsas she was for ever receiving from yourself and your fatherwhen her society must be so irksome.oh cried emma i know there is not a better creature in the worldbut you must allow that what is good and what is ridiculous aremost unfortunately blended in her.they are blended said he i acknowledge and were she prosperousi could allow much for the occasional prevalence of the ridiculousover the good.
were she a woman of fortune i would leave everyharmless absurdity to take its chance i would not quarrel with youfor any liberties of manner.
were she your equal in situationbut emma consider how far this is from being the case.
she is poorshe has sunk from the comforts she was born to and if she liveto old age must probably sink more.
her situation should secureyour compassion.
it was badly done indeed  you whom she had knownfrom an infant whom she had seen grow up from a period when hernotice was an honour to have you now in thoughtless spiritsand the pride of the moment laugh at her humble herand beforeher niece tooand before others many of whom certainly somewould be entirely guided by your treatment of her.this is notpleasant to you emmaand it is very far from pleasant to mebut i must i willi will tell you truths while i cansatisfied with proving myself your friend by very faithful counseland trusting that you will some time or other do me greater justicethan you can do now.while they talked they were advancing towards the carriageit was ready and before she could speak again he had handed her in.he had misinterpreted the feelings which had kept her face avertedand her tongue motionless.
they were combined only of angeragainst herself mortification and deep concern.
she had notbeen able to speak and on entering the carriage sunk backfor a moment overcomethen reproaching herself for having takenno leave making no acknowledgment parting in apparent sullennessshe looked out with voice and hand eager to shew a differencebut it was just too late.
he had turned away and the horses werein motion.
she continued to look back but in vain and soonwith what appeared unusual speed they were half way down the hilland every thing left far behind.
she was vexed beyond what couldhave been expressedalmost beyond what she could conceal.never had she felt so agitated mortified grieved at any circumstancein her life.
she was most forcibly struck.
the truth of thisrepresentation there was no denying.
she felt it at her heart.how could she have been so brutal so cruel to miss bates  how couldshe have exposed herself to such ill opinion in any one she valuedand how suffer him to leave her without saying one word of gratitudeof concurrence of common kindnesstime did not compose her.
as she reflected more she seemedbut to feel it more.
she never had been so depressed.
happily itwas not necessary to speak.
there was only harriet who seemed notin spirits herself fagged and very willing to be silent and emmafelt the tears running down her cheeks almost all the way homewithout being at any trouble to check them extraordinary as they were.chapter viiithe wretchedness of a scheme to box hill was in emmas thoughts allthe evening.
how it might be considered by the rest of the partyshe could not tell.
they in their different homes and their differentways might be looking back on it with pleasure but in her view itwas a morning more completely misspent more totally bare of rationalsatisfaction at the time and more to be abhorred in recollectionthan any she had ever passed.
a whole evening of backgammon withher father was felicity to it.
there indeed lay real pleasurefor there she was giving up the sweetest hours of the twentyfourto his comfort and feeling that unmerited as might be the degreeof his fond affection and confiding esteem she could not in hergeneral conduct be open to any severe reproach.
as a daughtershe hoped she was not without a heart.
she hoped no one couldhave said to her how could you be so unfeeling to your fatheri must i will tell you truths while i can.
miss bates shouldnever againno never  if attention in future could do awaythe past she might hope to be forgiven.
she had been often remissher conscience told her so remiss perhaps more in thoughtthan fact scornful ungracious.
but it should be so no more.in the warmth of true contrition she would call upon her thevery next morning and it should be the beginning on her sideof a regular equal kindly intercourse.she was just as determined when the morrow came and went earlythat nothing might prevent her.
it was not unlikely she thoughtthat she might see mr. knightley in her way or perhaps he mightcome in while she were paying her visit.
she had no objection.she would not be ashamed of the appearance of the penitence so justlyand truly hers.
her eyes were towards donwell as she walked but shesaw him not.the ladies were all at home.
she had never rejoiced at the soundbefore nor ever before entered the passage nor walked up the stairswith any wish of giving pleasure but in conferring obligationor of deriving it except in subsequent ridicule.there was a bustle on her approach a good deal of moving and talking.she heard miss batess voice something was to be done in a hurrythe maid looked frightened and awkward hoped she would be pleasedto wait a moment and then ushered her in too soon.
the aunt andniece seemed both escaping into the adjoining room.
jane she hada distinct glimpse of looking extremely ill and before the doorhad shut them out she heard miss bates saying well my deari shall say you are laid down upon the bed and i am sure you areill enough.poor old mrs. bates civil and humble as usual looked as if shedid not quite understand what was going on.i am afraid jane is not very well said she but i do not knowthey tell me she is well.
i dare say my daughter will be here presentlymiss woodhouse.
i hope you find a chair.
i wish hetty had not gone.i am very little ablehave you a chair maam do you sit whereyou like  i am sure she will be here presently.emma seriously hoped she would.
she had a moments fear of missbates keeping away from her.
but miss bates soon camevery happyand obligedbut emmas conscience told her that there was not thesame cheerful volubility as beforeless ease of look and manner.a very friendly inquiry after miss fairfax she hoped might leadthe way to a return of old feelings.
the touch seemed immediate.ah  miss woodhouse how kind you arei suppose you have heardand are come to give us joy.
this does not seem much like joyindeed in metwinkling away a tear or twobut it will bevery trying for us to part with her after having had her so longand she has a dreadful headache just now writing all the morningsuch long letters you know to be written to colonel campbelland mrs. dixon.
my dear said i you will blind yourselffor tears were in her eyes perpetually.
one cannot wonderone cannot wonder.
it is a great change and though she isamazingly fortunatesuch a situation i suppose as no young womanbefore ever met with on first going outdo not think us ungratefulmiss woodhouse for such surprising good fortuneagain dispersingher tearsbut poor dear soul if you were to see what a headacheshe has.
when one is in great pain you know one cannot feelany blessing quite as it may deserve.
she is as low as possible.to look at her nobody would think how delighted and happy sheis to have secured such a situation.
you will excuse her notcoming to youshe is not ableshe is gone into her own roomi want her to lie down upon the bed.
my dear said i i shallsay you are laid down upon the bed  but however she is notshe is walking about the room.
but now that she has writtenher letters she says she shall soon be well.
she will be extremelysorry to miss seeing you miss woodhouse but your kindness willexcuse her.
you were kept waiting at the doori was quite ashamedbut somehow there was a little bustlefor it so happened that wehad not heard the knock and till you were on the stairs we didnot know any body was coming.
it is only mrs. cole said idepend upon it.
nobody else would come so early.
well said sheit must be borne some time or other and it may as well be now.but then patty came in and said it was you.
oh said iit is miss woodhouse  i am sure you will like to see her.i can see nobody said she and up she got and would go awayand that was what made us keep you waitingand extremely sorryand ashamed we were.
if you must go my dear said i you mustand i will say you are laid down upon the bed.emma was most sincerely interested.
her heart had been long growingkinder towards jane and this picture of her present sufferings actedas a cure of every former ungenerous suspicion and left her nothingbut pity and the remembrance of the less just and less gentlesensations of the past obliged her to admit that jane might verynaturally resolve on seeing mrs. cole or any other steady friendwhen she might not bear to see herself.
she spoke as she feltwith earnest regret and solicitudesincerely wishing that thecircumstances which she collected from miss bates to be now actuallydetermined on might be as much for miss fairfaxs advantageand comfort as possible.
it must be a severe trial to them all.she had understood it was to be delayed till colonel campbells return.so very kind replied miss bates.
but you are always kind.there was no bearing such an always and to break through herdreadful gratitude emma made the direct inquiry ofwheremay i askis miss fairfax goingto a mrs. smallridgecharming womanmost superiorto havethe charge of her three little girlsdelightful children.impossible that any situation could be more replete with comfortif we except perhaps mrs. sucklings own family and mrs. braggesbut mrs. smallridge is intimate with both and in the verysame neighbourhoodlives only four miles from maple grove.jane will be only four miles from maple grove.mrs.
elton i suppose has been the person to whom miss fairfax owesyes our good mrs. elton.
the most indefatigable true friend.she would not take a denial.
she would not let jane say no forwhen jane first heard of it it was the day before yesterdaythe very morning we were at donwell when jane first heard of itshe was quite decided against accepting the offer and for thereasons you mention exactly as you say she had made up her mindto close with nothing till colonel campbells return and nothingshould induce her to enter into any engagement at presentand so shetold mrs. elton over and over againand i am sure i had no moreidea that she would change her mindbut that good mrs. eltonwhose judgment never fails her saw farther than i did.
it is notevery body that would have stood out in such a kind way as she didand refuse to take janes answer but she positively declared shewould not write any such denial yesterday as jane wished hershe would waitand sure enough yesterday evening it was allsettled that jane should go.
quite a surprize to me  i had notthe least ideajane took mrs. elton aside and told her at oncethat upon thinking over the advantages of mrs. smallridges situationshe had come to the resolution of accepting it.i did not know a wordof it till it was all settled.you spent the evening with mrs. eltonyes all of us mrs. elton would have us come.
it was settled soupon the hill while we were walking about with mr. knightley.you must all spend your evening with us said shei positively musthave you all come.mr.
knightley was there too was heno not mr. knightley he declined it from the first and though ithought he would come because mrs. elton declared she would not lethim off he did notbut my mother and jane and i were all thereand a very agreeable evening we had.
such kind friends you knowmiss woodhouse one must always find agreeable though every bodyseemed rather fagged after the mornings party.
even pleasureyou know is fatiguingand i cannot say that any of them seemedvery much to have enjoyed it.
however i shall always think ita very pleasant party and feel extremely obliged to the kind friendswho included me in it.miss fairfax i suppose though you were not aware of it had beenmaking up her mind the whole dayi dare say she had.whenever the time may come it must be unwelcome to her and allher friendsbut i hope her engagement will have every alleviationthat is possiblei mean as to the character and manners of the family.thank you dear miss woodhouse.
yes indeed there is every thingin the world that can make her happy in it.
except the sucklingsand bragges there is not such another nursery establishmentso liberal and elegant in all mrs. eltons acquaintance.mrs.
smallridge a most delightful womana style of living almostequal to maple groveand as to the children except the littlesucklings and little bragges there are not such elegant sweetchildren anywhere.
jane will be treated with such regard and kindnessit will be nothing but pleasure a life of pleasure.and her salaryi really cannot venture to name her salary to you miss woodhouse.even you used as you are to great sums would hardly believe thatso much could be given to a young person like jane.ah madam cried emma if other children are at all like what iremember to have been myself i should think five times the amountof what i have ever yet heard named as a salary on such occasionsdearly earned.you are so noble in your ideasand when is miss fairfax to leave youvery soon very soon indeed thats the worst of it.within a fortnight.
mrs. smallridge is in a great hurry.
my poormother does not know how to bear it.
so then i try to put it out ofher thoughts and say come maam do not let us think about it any more.her friends must all be sorry to lose her and will not coloneland mrs. campbell be sorry to find that she has engaged herselfbefore their returnyes jane says she is sure they will but yet this is sucha situation as she cannot feel herself justified in declining.i was so astonished when she first told me what she had been sayingto mrs. elton and when mrs. elton at the same moment came congratulatingme upon it  it was before teastayno it could not be before teabecause we were just going to cardsand yet it was before teabecause i remember thinkingoh no now i recollect now i have itsomething happened before tea but not that.
mr. elton was calledout of the room before tea old john abdys son wanted to speakwith him.
poor old john i have a great regard for him he was clerkto my poor father twentyseven years and now poor old man he isbedridden and very poorly with the rheumatic gout in his jointsi must go and see him today and so will jane i am sure if shegets out at all.
and poor johns son came to talk to mr. eltonabout relief from the parish he is very well to do himselfyou know being head man at the crown ostler and every thingof that sort but still he cannot keep his father without some helpand so when mr. elton came back he told us what john ostlerhad been telling him and then it came out about the chaise havingbeen sent to randalls to take mr. frank churchill to richmond.that was what happened before tea.
it was after tea that jane spoketo mrs. elton.miss bates would hardly give emma time to say how perfectlynew this circumstance was to her but as without supposing itpossible that she could be ignorant of any of the particularsof mr. frank churchills going she proceeded to give them allit was of no consequence.what mr. elton had learned from the ostler on the subject being theaccumulation of the ostlers own knowledge and the knowledgeof the servants at randalls was that a messenger had come overfrom richmond soon after the return of the party from box hillwhich messenger however had been no more than was expectedand that mr. churchill had sent his nephew a few lines containingupon the whole a tolerable account of mrs. churchill and onlywishing him not to delay coming back beyond the next morning earlybut that mr. frank churchill having resolved to go home directlywithout waiting at all and his horse seeming to have got a coldtom had been sent off immediately for the crown chaise and theostler had stood out and seen it pass by the boy going a good paceand driving very steady.there was nothing in all this either to astonish or interestand it caught emmas attention only as it united with the subjectwhich already engaged her mind.
the contrast between mrs. churchillsimportance in the world and jane fairfaxs struck her one wasevery thing the other nothingand she sat musing on the differenceof womans destiny and quite unconscious on what her eyes were fixedtill roused by miss batess sayingaye i see what you are thinking of the pianoforte.
what is to becomeof thatvery true.
poor dear jane was talking of it just now.you must go said she.
you and i must part.
you will have nobusiness here.let it stay however said she give it houseroomtill colonel campbell comes back.
i shall talk about it to himhe will settle for me he will help me out of all my difficulties.and to this day i do believe she knows not whether it was hispresent or his daughters.now emma was obliged to think of the pianoforte and the remembranceof all her former fanciful and unfair conjectures was so little pleasingthat she soon allowed herself to believe her visit had beenlong enough and with a repetition of every thing that she couldventure to say of the good wishes which she really felt took leave.chapter ixemmas pensive meditations as she walked home were not interruptedbut on entering the parlour she found those who must rouse her.mr.
knightley and harriet had arrived during her absence and weresitting with her father.mr.
knightley immediately got up and in amanner decidedly graver than usual saidi would not go away without seeing you but i have no time to spareand therefore must now be gone directly.
i am going to londonto spend a few days with john and isabella.
have you any thing tosend or say besides the love which nobody carriesnothing at all.
but is not this a sudden schemeyesratheri have been thinking of it some little time.emma was sure he had not forgiven her he looked unlike himself.time however she thought would tell him that they ought to befriends again.
while he stood as if meaning to go but not goingher father began his inquiries.well my dear and did you get there safelyand how did youfind my worthy old friend and her daughteri dare say they musthave been very much obliged to you for coming.
dear emma has beento call on mrs. and miss bates mr. knightley as i told you before.she is always so attentive to thememmas colour was heightened by this unjust praise and with a smileand shake of the head which spoke much she looked at mr. knightley.it seemed as if there were an instantaneous impression in her favouras if his eyes received the truth from hers and all that hadpassed of good in her feelings were at once caught and honoured.he looked at her with a glow of regard.
she was warmly gratifiedand in another moment still more so by a little movement ofmore than common friendliness on his part.he took her handwhether she had not herself made the first motion she could not sayshe might perhaps have rather offered itbut he took her handpressed it and certainly was on the point of carrying it to his lipswhen from some fancy or other he suddenly let it go.why he should feelsuch a scruple why he should change his mind when it was all but doneshe could not perceive.he would have judged better she thoughtif he had not stopped.the intention however was indubitableand whether it was that his manners had in general so little gallantryor however else it happened but she thought nothing became him more.it was with him of so simple yet so dignified a nature.she could not but recall the attempt with great satisfaction.it spoke such perfect amity.he left them immediately afterwardsgone in a moment.
he always moved with the alertness of a mind whichcould neither be undecided nor dilatory but now he seemed more suddenthan usual in his disappearance.emma could not regret her having gone to miss bates but she wishedshe had left her ten minutes earlierit would have been a greatpleasure to talk over jane fairfaxs situation with mr. knightley.neither would she regret that he should be going to brunswick squarefor she knew how much his visit would be enjoyedbut it might havehappened at a better timeand to have had longer notice of itwould have been pleasanter.they parted thorough friends howevershe could not be deceived as to the meaning of his countenanceand his unfinished gallantryit was all done to assure her that shehad fully recovered his good opinion.he had been sitting with themhalf an hour she found.
it was a pity that she had not comeback earlierin the hope of diverting her fathers thoughts from the disagreeablenessof mr. knightleys going to london and going so suddenlyand going on horseback which she knew would be all very bademma communicated her news of jane fairfax and her dependenceon the effect was justified it supplied a very useful checkinterested without disturbing him.
he had long made up his mind to janefairfaxs going out as governess and could talk of it cheerfullybut mr. knightleys going to london had been an unexpected blow.i am very glad indeed my dear to hear she is to be socomfortably settled.
mrs. elton is very goodnatured and agreeableand i dare say her acquaintance are just what they oughtto be.
i hope it is a dry situation and that her healthwill be taken good care of.
it ought to be a first objectas i am sure poor miss taylors always was with me.
you knowmy dear she is going to be to this new lady what miss taylorwas to us.
and i hope she will be better off in one respectand not be induced to go away after it has been her home so long.the following day brought news from richmond to throw everything else into the background.
an express arrived at randallsto announce the death of mrs. churchill  though her nephewhad had no particular reason to hasten back on her accountshe had not lived above sixandthirty hours after his return.a sudden seizure of a different nature from any thing forebodedby her general state had carried her off after a short struggle.the great mrs. churchill was no more.it was felt as such things must be felt.
every body had adegree of gravity and sorrow tenderness towards the departedsolicitude for the surviving friends and in a reasonable timecuriosity to know where she would be buried.
goldsmith tells usthat when lovely woman stoops to folly she has nothing to dobut to die and when she stoops to be disagreeable it is equallyto be recommended as a clearer of illfame.
mrs. churchillafter being disliked at least twentyfive years was now spoken ofwith compassionate allowances.
in one point she was fully justified.she had never been admitted before to be seriously ill.  the eventacquitted her of all the fancifulness and all the selfishnessof imaginary complaints.poor mrs. churchill no doubt she had been suffering a great dealmore than any body had ever supposedand continual pain would trythe temper.
it was a sad eventa great shockwith all her faultswhat would mr. churchill do without her  mr. churchills losswould be dreadful indeed.
mr. churchill would never get over it.even mr. weston shook his head and looked solemn and saidah poor woman who would have thought it and resolved that hismourning should be as handsome as possible and his wife sat sighingand moralising over her broad hems with a commiseration and good sensetrue and steady.
how it would affect frank was among the earliestthoughts of both.
it was also a very early speculation with emma.the character of mrs. churchill the grief of her husbandher mindglanced over them both with awe and compassionand then restedwith lightened feelings on how frank might be affected by the eventhow benefited how freed.
she saw in a moment all the possible good.now an attachment to harriet smith would have nothing to encounter.mr.
churchill independent of his wife was feared by nobodyan easy guidable man to be persuaded into any thing by his nephew.all that remained to be wished was that the nephew should formthe attachment as with all her goodwill in the cause emma could feelno certainty of its being already formed.harriet behaved extremely well on the occasion with great selfcommand.what ever she might feel of brighter hope she betrayed nothing.
emma wasgratified to observe such a proof in her of strengthened characterand refrained from any allusion that might endanger its maintenance.they spoke therefore of mrs. churchills death with mutual forbearance.short letters from frank were received at randalls communicatingall that was immediately important of their state and plans.mr.
churchill was better than could be expected and theirfirst removal on the departure of the funeral for yorkshirewas to be to the house of a very old friend in windsor to whommr.
churchill had been promising a visit the last ten years.at present there was nothing to be done for harriet good wishesfor the future were all that could yet be possible on emmas side.it was a more pressing concern to shew attention to jane fairfaxwhose prospects were closing while harriets opened and whoseengagements now allowed of no delay in any one at highbury who wishedto shew her kindnessand with emma it was grown into a first wish.she had scarcely a stronger regret than for her past coldnessand the person whom she had been so many months neglecting was nowthe very one on whom she would have lavished every distinction ofregard or sympathy.
she wanted to be of use to her wanted to shewa value for her society and testify respect and consideration.she resolved to prevail on her to spend a day at hartfield.a note was written to urge it.
the invitation was refused and bya verbal message.
miss fairfax was not well enough to writeand when mr. perry called at hartfield the same morningit appeared that she was so much indisposed as to have been visitedthough against her own consent by himself and that she was sufferingunder severe headaches and a nervous fever to a degree which madehim doubt the possibility of her going to mrs. smallridges at thetime proposed.
her health seemed for the moment completely derangedappetite quite goneand though there were no absolutelyalarming symptoms nothing touching the pulmonary complaintwhich was the standing apprehension of the family mr. perry wasuneasy about her.
he thought she had undertaken more than shewas equal to and that she felt it so herself though she wouldnot own it.
her spirits seemed overcome.
her present homehe could not but observe was unfavourable to a nervous disorderconfined always to one roomhe could have wished it otherwiseand her good aunt though his very old friend he must acknowledgeto be not the best companion for an invalid of that description.her care and attention could not be questioned they were in factonly too great.
he very much feared that miss fairfax derived moreevil than good from them.
emma listened with the warmest concerngrieved for her more and more and looked around eager to discoversome way of being useful.
to take herbe it only an houror twofrom her aunt to give her change of air and sceneand quiet rational conversation even for an hour or twomight do her good and the following morning she wrote again to sayin the most feeling language she could command that she wouldcall for her in the carriage at any hour that jane would namementioning that she had mr. perrys decided opinion in favourof such exercise for his patient.
the answer was only in thisshort notemiss fairfaxs compliments and thanks but is quite unequalto any exercise.emma felt that her own note had deserved something better but itwas impossible to quarrel with words whose tremulous inequalityshewed indisposition so plainly and she thought only of how shemight best counteract this unwillingness to be seen or assisted.in spite of the answer therefore she ordered the carriage and droveto mrs. batess in the hope that jane would be induced to join herbut it would not domiss bates came to the carriage door all gratitudeand agreeing with her most earnestly in thinking an airing might be ofthe greatest serviceand every thing that message could do was triedbut all in vain.
miss bates was obliged to return without successjane was quite unpersuadable the mere proposal of going outseemed to make her worse.emma wished she could have seen herand tried her own powers but almost before she could hint the wishmiss bates made it appear that she had promised her niece onno account to let miss woodhouse in.
indeed the truth wasthat poor dear jane could not bear to see any bodyany body at allmrs.
elton indeed could not be deniedand mrs. cole had madesuch a pointand mrs. perry had said so muchbut except themjane would really see nobody.emma did not want to be classed with the mrs. eltons the mrs. perrysand the mrs. coles who would force themselves anywhereneither could she feel any right of preference herselfshe submitted therefore and only questioned miss bates fartheras to her nieces appetite and diet which she longed to be ableto assist.
on that subject poor miss bates was very unhappyand very communicative jane would hardly eat any thingmr.
perry recommended nourishing food but every thing they couldcommand and never had any body such good neighbours was distasteful.emma on reaching home called the housekeeper directly to anexamination of her stores and some arrowroot of very superior qualitywas speedily despatched to miss bates with a most friendly note.in half an hour the arrowroot was returned with a thousand thanksfrom miss bates but dear jane would not be satisfied without itsbeing sent back it was a thing she could not takeand moreovershe insisted on her saying that she was not at all in want of any thing.when emma afterwards heard that jane fairfax had been seen wanderingabout the meadows at some distance from highbury on the afternoonof the very day on which she had under the plea of being unequalto any exercise so peremptorily refused to go out with her inthe carriage she could have no doubtputting every thing togetherthat jane was resolved to receive no kindness from her.
she was sorryvery sorry.
her heart was grieved for a state which seemedbut the more pitiable from this sort of irritation of spiritsinconsistency of action and inequality of powers and it mortifiedher that she was given so little credit for proper feeling or esteemedso little worthy as a friend  but she had the consolation of knowingthat her intentions were good and of being able to say to herselfthat could mr. knightley have been privy to all her attemptsof assisting jane fairfax could he even have seen into her hearthe would not on this occasion have found any thing to reprove.chapter xone morning about ten days after mrs. churchills deceaseemma was called downstairs to mr. weston who could not stayfive minutes and wanted particularly to speak with her.he met her at the parlourdoor and hardly asking her how she didin the natural key of his voice sunk it immediately to sayunheard by her fathercan you come to randalls at any time this morningdo if itbe possible.
mrs. weston wants to see you.
she must see you.is she unwellno no not at allonly a little agitated.
she would haveordered the carriage and come to you but she must see you aloneand that you knownodding towards her fatherhumphcan you comecertainly.
this moment if you please.
it is impossible torefuse what you ask in such a way.
but what can be the matteris she really not illdepend upon mebut ask no more questions.
you will know itall in time.
the most unaccountable business  but hush hushto guess what all this meant was impossible even for emma.something really important seemed announced by his looksbut as her friend was well she endeavoured not to be uneasyand settling it with her father that she would take her walk nowshe and mr. weston were soon out of the house together and ontheir way at a quick pace for randalls.nowsaid emma when they were fairly beyond the sweep gatesnow mr. weston do let me know what has happened.no nohe gravely replied.dont ask me.
i promised my wifeto leave it all to her.
she will break it to you better than i can.do not be impatient emma it will all come out too soon.break it to me cried emma standing still with terror.good godmr.
weston tell me at once.something has happenedin brunswick square.
i know it has.
tell me i charge you tellme this moment what it is.no indeed you are mistaken.mr.
weston do not trifle with me.consider how many of my dearestfriends are now in brunswick square.
which of them is iti charge you by all that is sacred not to attempt concealment.upon my word emma.your wordwhy not your honourwhy not say upon your honourthat it has nothing to do with any of them  good heavenswhat canbe to be broke to me that does not relate to one of that familyupon my honour said he very seriously it does not.
it is notin the smallest degree connected with any human being of the nameof knightley.emmas courage returned and she walked on.i was wrong he continued in talking of its being broke to you.i should not have used the expression.
in fact it does not concern youit concerns only myselfthat is we hope.humphin shortmy dear emma there is no occasion to be so uneasy about it.i dont say that it is not a disagreeable businessbut things mightbe much worse.if we walk fast we shall soon be at randalls.emma found that she must wait and now it required little effort.she asked no more questions therefore merely employed her own fancyand that soon pointed out to her the probability of its being somemoney concernsomething just come to light of a disagreeablenature in the circumstances of the familysomething which the lateevent at richmond had brought forward.
her fancy was very active.half a dozen natural children perhapsand poor frank cut offthis though very undesirable would be no matter of agony to her.it inspired little more than an animating curiosity.who is that gentleman on horseback said she as they proceededspeaking more to assist mr. weston in keeping his secret than withany other view.i do not know.one of the otways.not frankit is not franki assure you.
you will not see him.
he is half way to windsorby this time.has your son been with you thenoh yesdid not you knowwell well never mind.for a moment he was silent and then added in a tone much moreguarded and demureyes frank came over this morning just to ask us how we did.they hurried on and were speedily at randalls.well my dearsaid he as they entered the roomi have brought her and nowi hope you will soon be better.
i shall leave you together.there is no use in delay.
i shall not be far off if you want me.and emma distinctly heard him add in a lower tone before hequitted the roomi have been as good as my word.
she has not theleast idea.mrs.
weston was looking so ill and had an air of so much perturbationthat emmas uneasiness increased and the moment they were aloneshe eagerly saidwhat is it my dear friend  something of a very unpleasant naturei find has occurreddo let me know directly what it is.i have been walking all this way in complete suspense.
we bothabhor suspense.
do not let mine continue longer.
it will do yougood to speak of your distress whatever it may be.have you indeed no idea said mrs. weston in a trembling voice.cannot you my dear emmacannot you form a guess as to what youare to hearso far as that it relates to mr. frank churchill i do guess.you are right.
it does relate to him and i will tell you directlyresuming her work and seeming resolved against looking up.he has been here this very morning on a most extraordinary errand.it is impossible to express our surprize.
he came to speak to hisfather on a subjectto announce an attachmentshe stopped to breathe.
emma thought first of herself and thenof harriet.more than an attachment indeed resumed mrs. weston an engagementa positive engagement.what will you say emmawhat will anybody say when it is known that frank churchill and miss fairfaxare engagednay that they have been long engagedemma even jumped with surprizeand horrorstruck exclaimedjane fairfaxgood god  you are not serious  you do not mean ityou may well be amazed returned mrs. weston still averting her eyesand talking on with eagerness that emma might have time to recoveryou may well be amazed.
but it is even so.
there has been a solemnengagement between them ever since octoberformed at weymouthand kept a secret from every body.
not a creature knowing itbut themselvesneither the campbells nor her family nor his.it is so wonderful that though perfectly convinced of the factit is yet almost incredible to myself.
i can hardly believe it.i thought i knew him.emma scarcely heard what was said.her mind was divided betweentwo ideasher own former conversations with him about miss fairfaxand poor harrietand for some time she could only exclaimand require confirmation repeated confirmation.well said she at last trying to recover herself this is acircumstance which i must think of at least half a day before ican at all comprehend it.
whatengaged to her all the winterbefore either of them came to highburyengaged since octobersecretly engaged.it has hurt meemma very much.
it has hurt his father equally.
some partof his conduct we cannot excuse.emma pondered a moment and then replied i will not pretendnot to understand you and to give you all the relief in my powerbe assured that no such effect has followed his attentions to meas you are apprehensive of.mrs.
weston looked up afraid to believe but emmas countenancewas as steady as her words.that you may have less difficulty in believing this boast of mypresent perfect indifference she continued i will farther tell youthat there was a period in the early part of our acquaintancewhen i did like him when i was very much disposed to beattached to himnay was attachedand how it came to ceaseis perhaps the wonder.
fortunately however it did cease.i have really for some time past for at least these three monthscared nothing about him.
you may believe me mrs. weston.this is the simple truth.mrs.
weston kissed her with tears of joy and when she couldfind utterance assured her that this protestation had doneher more good than any thing else in the world could do.mr.
weston will be almost as much relieved as myself said she.on this point we have been wretched.
it was our darling wish that youmight be attached to each otherand we were persuaded that it was so.imagine what we have been feeling on your account.i have escaped and that i should escape may be a matter ofgrateful wonder to you and myself.
but this does not acquit himmrs.
weston and i must say that i think him greatly to blame.what right had he to come among us with affection and faith engagedand with manners so very disengaged  what right had he to endeavourto please as he certainly didto distinguish any one young woman withpersevering attention as he certainly didwhile he really belongedto anotherhow could he tell what mischief he might be doinghow could he tell that he might not be making me in love with himvery wrong very wrong indeed.from something that he said my dear emma i rather imagineand how could she bear such behaviour  composure with a witnessto look on while repeated attentions were offering to another womanbefore her face and not resent it.that is a degree of placiditywhich i can neither comprehend nor respect.there were misunderstandings between them emma he saidso expressly.
he had not time to enter into much explanation.he was here only a quarter of an hour and in a state of agitationwhich did not allow the full use even of the time he could staybut that there had been misunderstandings he decidedly said.the present crisis indeed seemed to be brought on by themand those misunderstandings might very possibly arise from theimpropriety of his conduct.impropriety  oh  mrs. westonit is too calm a censure.much much beyond improprietyit has sunk him i cannot say howit has sunk him in my opinion.
so unlike what a man should benone of that upright integrity that strict adherence to truthand principle that disdain of trick and littleness which a manshould display in every transaction of his life.nay dear emma now i must take his part for though he has beenwrong in this instance i have known him long enough to answerfor his having many very many good qualities andgood god cried emma not attending to her.mrs.
smallridge toojane actually on the point of going as governess  what could hemean by such horrible indelicacy  to suffer her to engage herselfto suffer her even to think of such a measurehe knew nothing about it emma.
on this article i can fullyacquit him.
it was a private resolution of hers not communicatedto himor at least not communicated in a way to carry conviction.till yesterday i know he said he was in the dark as to her plans.they burst on him i do not know how but by some letter or messageand it was the discovery of what she was doing of this very projectof hers which determined him to come forward at once own itall to his uncle throw himself on his kindness and in shortput an end to the miserable state of concealment that had beencarrying on so long.emma began to listen better.i am to hear from him soon continued mrs. weston.
he told meat parting that he should soon write and he spoke in a manner whichseemed to promise me many particulars that could not be given now.let us wait therefore for this letter.
it may bring many extenuations.it may make many things intelligible and excusable which now arenot to be understood.
dont let us be severe dont let us be ina hurry to condemn him.
let us have patience.
i must love himand now that i am satisfied on one point the one material pointi am sincerely anxious for its all turning out well and readyto hope that it may.
they must both have suffered a great dealunder such a system of secresy and concealment.his sufferings replied emma dryly do not appear to have donehim much harm.
well and how did mr. churchill take itmost favourably for his nephewgave his consent with scarcelya difficulty.
conceive what the events of a week have donein that family  while poor mrs. churchill lived i suppose therecould not have been a hope a chance a possibilitybut scarcelyare her remains at rest in the family vault than her husband ispersuaded to act exactly opposite to what she would have required.what a blessing it is when undue influence does not survive the gravehe gave his consent with very little persuasion.ah thought emma he would have done as much for harriet.this was settled last night and frank was off with the lightthis morning.
he stopped at highbury at the batess i fancysome timeand then came on hither but was in such a hurry to getback to his uncle to whom he is just now more necessary than everthat as i tell you he could stay with us but a quarter of an hour.he was very much agitatedvery much indeedto a degree that madehim appear quite a different creature from any thing i had ever seenhim before.in addition to all the rest there had been the shock offinding her so very unwell which he had had no previous suspicion ofand there was every appearance of his having been feeling a great deal.and do you really believe the affair to have been carrying onwith such perfect secresythe campbells the dixons did noneof them know of the engagementemma could not speak the name of dixon without a little blush.none not one.
he positively said that it had been known to nobeing in the world but their two selves.well said emma i suppose we shall gradually grow reconciledto the idea and i wish them very happy.
but i shall alwaysthink it a very abominable sort of proceeding.
what has it beenbut a system of hypocrisy and deceitespionage and treacheryto come among us with professions of openness and simplicityand such a league in secret to judge us allhere have we beenthe whole winter and spring completely duped fancying ourselvesall on an equal footing of truth and honour with two people in themidst of us who may have been carrying round comparing and sittingin judgment on sentiments and words that were never meant for bothto hear.they must take the consequence if they have heard eachother spoken of in a way not perfectly agreeablei am quite easy on that head replied mrs. weston.
i amvery sure that i never said any thing of either to the otherwhich both might not have heard.you are in luck.your only blunder was confined to my earwhen you imagined a certain friend of ours in love with the lady.true.
but as i have always had a thoroughly good opinion of missfairfax i never could under any blunder have spoken ill of herand as to speaking ill of him there i must have been safe.at this moment mr. weston appeared at a little distance from the windowevidently on the watch.
his wife gave him a look which invitedhim in and while he was coming round added now dearest emmalet me intreat you to say and look every thing that may set hisheart at ease and incline him to be satisfied with the match.let us make the best of itand indeed almost every thing maybe fairly said in her favour.
it is not a connexion to gratifybut if mr. churchill does not feel that why should we and itmay be a very fortunate circumstance for him for frank i meanthat he should have attached himself to a girl of such steadinessof character and good judgment as i have always given her credit forand still am disposed to give her credit for in spite of thisone great deviation from the strict rule of right.
and how muchmay be said in her situation for even that errormuch indeed cried emma feelingly.
if a woman can everbe excused for thinking only of herself it is in a situationlike jane fairfaxs.of such one may almost say that theworld is not theirs nor the worlds law.she met mr. weston on his entrance with a smiling countenanceexclaiminga very pretty trick you have been playing me upon my wordthis was a device i suppose to sport with my curiosityand exercise my talent of guessing.
but you really frightened me.i thought you had lost half your property at least.
and hereinstead of its being a matter of condolence it turns out to be oneof congratulation.i congratulate you mr. weston with all my hearton the prospect of having one of the most lovely and accomplishedyoung women in england for your daughter.a glance or two between him and his wife convinced him that all wasas right as this speech proclaimed and its happy effect on his spiritswas immediate.
his air and voice recovered their usual brisknesshe shook her heartily and gratefully by the hand and enteredon the subject in a manner to prove that he now only wantedtime and persuasion to think the engagement no very bad thing.his companions suggested only what could palliate imprudenceor smooth objections and by the time they had talked it allover together and he had talked it all over again with emmain their walk back to hartfield he was become perfectly reconciledand not far from thinking it the very best thing that frank couldpossibly have done.chapter xiharriet poor harrietthose were the words in them lay thetormenting ideas which emma could not get rid of and which constitutedthe real misery of the business to her.
frank churchill had behavedvery ill by herselfvery ill in many waysbut it was not so muchhis behaviour as her own which made her so angry with him.it was the scrape which he had drawn her into on harriets accountthat gave the deepest hue to his offence.poor harriet to be a secondtime the dupe of her misconceptions and flattery.
mr. knightleyhad spoken prophetically when he once said emma you have beenno friend to harriet smith.she was afraid she had done her nothingbut disservice.it was true that she had not to charge herselfin this instance as in the former with being the sole and originalauthor of the mischief with having suggested such feelings as mightotherwise never have entered harriets imagination for harriethad acknowledged her admiration and preference of frank churchillbefore she had ever given her a hint on the subject but she feltcompletely guilty of having encouraged what she might have repressed.she might have prevented the indulgence and increase of such sentiments.her influence would have been enough.
and now she was very consciousthat she ought to have prevented them.she felt that she had beenrisking her friends happiness on most insufficient grounds.common sense would have directed her to tell harriet that shemust not allow herself to think of him and that there were fivehundred chances to one against his ever caring for her.but withcommon sense she added i am afraid i have had little to do.she was extremely angry with herself.
if she could not have beenangry with frank churchill too it would have been dreadful.as for jane fairfax she might at least relieve her feelingsfrom any present solicitude on her account.
harriet wouldbe anxiety enough she need no longer be unhappy about janewhose troubles and whose illhealth having of course the same originmust be equally under cure.her days of insignificance and evilwere over.she would soon be well and happy and prosperous.emma could now imagine why her own attentions had been slighted.this discovery laid many smaller matters open.
no doubt it had beenfrom jealousy.in janes eyes she had been a rival and well mightany thing she could offer of assistance or regard be repulsed.an airing in the hartfield carriage would have been the rackand arrowroot from the hartfield storeroom must have been poison.she understood it all and as far as her mind could disengage itselffrom the injustice and selfishness of angry feelings she acknowledgedthat jane fairfax would have neither elevation nor happiness beyondher desert.
but poor harriet was such an engrossing chargethere was little sympathy to be spared for any body else.emma was sadly fearful that this second disappointment would bemore severe than the first.
considering the very superior claimsof the object it ought and judging by its apparently stronger effecton harriets mind producing reserve and selfcommand it would.she must communicate the painful truth however and as soonas possible.
an injunction of secresy had been among mr. westonsparting words.
for the present the whole affair was to becompletely a secret.
mr. churchill had made a point of itas a token of respect to the wife he had so very recently lostand every body admitted it to be no more than due decorum.emma had promised but still harriet must be excepted.
it was hersuperior duty.in spite of her vexation she could not help feeling it almost ridiculousthat she should have the very same distressing and delicate office toperform by harriet which mrs. weston had just gone through by herself.the intelligence which had been so anxiously announced to hershe was now to be anxiously announcing to another.
her heart beatquick on hearing harriets footstep and voice so she supposedhad poor mrs. weston felt when she was approaching randalls.could the event of the disclosure bear an equal resemblancebut of that unfortunately there could be no chance.well miss woodhouse cried harriet coming eagerly into the roomis not this the oddest news that ever waswhat news do you mean replied emma unable to guess by lookor voice whether harriet could indeed have received any hint.about jane fairfax.
did you ever hear any thing so strangeohyou need not be afraid of owning it to me for mr. weston hastold me himself.
i met him just now.
he told me it was to bea great secret and therefore i should not think of mentioningit to any body but you but he said you knew it.what did mr. weston tell yousaid emma still perplexed.oh he told me all about it that jane fairfax and mr. frankchurchill are to be married and that they have been privatelyengaged to one another this long while.
how very oddit was indeed so odd harriets behaviour was so extremely oddthat emma did not know how to understand it.
her character appearedabsolutely changed.
she seemed to propose shewing no agitationor disappointment or peculiar concern in the discovery.
emma lookedat her quite unable to speak.had you any idea cried harriet of his being in lovewith heryou perhaps might.you blushing as she spokewho can see into every bodys heart but nobody elseupon my word said emma i begin to doubt my having any such talent.can you seriously ask me harriet whether i imagined him attachedto another woman at the very time that i wastacitly if not openlyencouraging you to give way to your own feelingsi never hadthe slightest suspicion till within the last hour of mr. frankchurchills having the least regard for jane fairfax.
you may bevery sure that if i had i should have cautioned you accordingly.me cried harriet colouring and astonished.
why should youcaution meyou do not think i care about mr. frank churchill.i am delighted to hear you speak so stoutly on the subjectreplied emma smiling but you do not mean to deny that therewas a timeand not very distant eitherwhen you gave me reasonto understand that you did care about himhimnever never.
dear miss woodhouse how could you so mistake meturning away distressed.harriet cried emma after a moments pausewhat do you meangood heaven what do you meanmistake youam i to suppose thenshe could not speak another word.her voice was lost and shesat down waiting in great terror till harriet should answer.harriet who was standing at some distance and with face turnedfrom her did not immediately say any thing and when she did speakit was in a voice nearly as agitated as emmas.i should not have thought it possible she began that youcould have misunderstood me  i know we agreed never to name himbut considering how infinitely superior he is to every body elsei should not have thought it possible that i could be supposedto mean any other person.
mr. frank churchill indeed  i do notknow who would ever look at him in the company of the other.i hope i have a better taste than to think of mr. frank churchillwho is like nobody by his side.
and that you should have beenso mistaken is amazingi am sure but for believing that youentirely approved and meant to encourage me in my attachmenti should have considered it at first too great a presumption almostto dare to think of him.
at first if you had not told methat more wonderful things had happened that there had beenmatches of greater disparity those were your very wordsi should not have dared to give way toi should not have thoughtit possiblebut if you who had been always acquainted with himharriet cried emma collecting herself resolutelylet usunderstand each other now without the possibility of farther mistake.are you speaking ofmr.
knightleyto be sure i am.
i never could have an idea of any body elseand so i thought you knew.
when we talked about him it was as clearas possible.not quite returned emma with forced calmness for all thatyou then said appeared to me to relate to a different person.i could almost assert that you had named mr. frank churchill.i am sure the service mr. frank churchill had rendered youin protecting you from the gipsies was spoken of.oh  miss woodhouse how you do forgetmy dear harriet i perfectly remember the substance of what isaid on the occasion.
i told you that i did not wonder atyour attachment that considering the service he had rendered youit was extremely naturaland you agreed to it expressing yourselfvery warmly as to your sense of that service and mentioningeven what your sensations had been in seeing him come forwardto your rescue.the impression of it is strong on my memory.oh dear cried harriet now i recollect what you mean but iwas thinking of something very different at the time.
it was notthe gipsiesit was not mr. frank churchill that i meant.
no withsome elevation i was thinking of a much more precious circumstanceof mr. knightleys coming and asking me to dance when mr. eltonwould not stand up with me and when there was no other partner inthe room.
that was the kind action that was the noble benevolenceand generosity that was the service which made me begin to feelhow superior he was to every other being upon earth.good god cried emma this has been a most unfortunatemost deplorable mistakewhat is to be doneyou would not have encouraged me then if you had understood meat least however i cannot be worse off than i should have beenif the other had been the person and nowit is possibleshe paused a few moments.
emma could not speak.i do not wonder miss woodhouse she resumed that you should feela great difference between the two as to me or as to any body.you must think one five hundred million times more above me thanthe other.
but i hope miss woodhouse that supposingthat ifstrange as it may appear.
but you know they were your own wordsthat more wonderful things had happened matches of greater disparityhad taken place than between mr. frank churchill and me and thereforeit seems as if such a thing even as this may have occurred beforeand if i should be so fortunate beyond expression as toif mr. knightley should reallyif he does not mind the disparityi hope dear miss woodhouse you will not set yourself against itand try to put difficulties in the way.
but you are too good for thati am sure.harriet was standing at one of the windows.
emma turned roundto look at her in consternation and hastily saidhave you any idea of mr. knightleys returning your affectionyes replied harriet modestly but not fearfullyi must saythat i have.emmas eyes were instantly withdrawn and she sat silently meditatingin a fixed attitude for a few minutes.
a few minutes were sufficientfor making her acquainted with her own heart.
a mind like hersonce opening to suspicion made rapid progress.
she touchedshe admittedshe acknowledged the whole truth.
why was itso much worse that harriet should be in love with mr. knightleythan with frank churchill  why was the evil so dreadfully increasedby harriets having some hope of a return  it darted through herwith the speed of an arrow that mr. knightley must marry no onebut herselfher own conduct as well as her own heart was before her in thesame few minutes.
she saw it all with a clearness which hadnever blessed her before.
how improperly had she been actingby harriet  how inconsiderate how indelicate how irrationalhow unfeeling had been her conduct  what blindness what madnesshad led her on  it struck her with dreadful force and shewas ready to give it every bad name in the world.
some portionof respect for herself however in spite of all these demeritssome concern for her own appearance and a strong sense of justiceby harrietthere would be no need of compassion to the girlwho believed herself loved by mr. knightleybut justice requiredthat she should not be made unhappy by any coldness nowgave emma the resolution to sit and endure farther with calmnesswith even apparent kindness.for her own advantage indeed it was fitthat the utmost extent of harriets hopes should be enquired intoand harriet had done nothing to forfeit the regard and interestwhich had been so voluntarily formed and maintainedor to deserveto be slighted by the person whose counsels had never led her right.rousing from reflection therefore and subduing her emotionshe turned to harriet again and in a more inviting accent renewedthe conversation for as to the subject which had first introduced itthe wonderful story of jane fairfax that was quite sunk and lost.neither of them thought but of mr. knightley and themselves.harriet who had been standing in no unhappy reverie was yet very gladto be called from it by the now encouraging manner of such a judgeand such a friend as miss woodhouse and only wanted invitationto give the history of her hopes with great though tremblingdelight.emmas tremblings as she asked and as she listenedwere better concealed than harriets but they were not less.her voice was not unsteady but her mind was in all the perturbationthat such a development of self such a burst of threatening evilsuch a confusion of sudden and perplexing emotions must create.she listened with much inward suffering but with great outwardpatience to harriets detail.methodical or well arrangedor very well delivered it could not be expected to bebut it contained when separated from all the feebleness andtautology of the narration a substance to sink her spiritespecially with the corroborating circumstances which her own memorybrought in favour of mr. knightleys most improved opinion of harriet.harriet had been conscious of a difference in his behaviour ever sincethose two decisive dances.emma knew that he had on that occasionfound her much superior to his expectation.
from that eveningor at least from the time of miss woodhouses encouraging herto think of him harriet had begun to be sensible of his talkingto her much more than he had been used to do and of his havingindeed quite a different manner towards her a manner of kindnessand sweetnesslatterly she had been more and more aware of it.when they had been all walking together he had so often come and walkedby her and talked so very delightfullyhe seemed to want to beacquainted with her.
emma knew it to have been very much the case.she had often observed the change to almost the same extent.harriet repeated expressions of approbation and praise from himand emma felt them to be in the closest agreement with what she hadknown of his opinion of harriet.
he praised her for being withoutart or affectation for having simple honest generous feelings.she knew that he saw such recommendations in harriet he had dwelton them to her more than once.much that lived in harriets memorymany little particulars of the notice she had received from him a looka speech a removal from one chair to another a compliment implieda preference inferred had been unnoticed because unsuspectedby emma.
circumstances that might swell to half an hours relationand contained multiplied proofs to her who had seen them had passedundiscerned by her who now heard them but the two latest occurrencesto be mentioned the two of strongest promise to harriet were notwithout some degree of witness from emma herself.the firstwas his walking with her apart from the others in the limewalkat donwell where they had been walking some time before emma cameand he had taken pains as she was convinced to draw her fromthe rest to himselfand at first he had talked to her in a moreparticular way than he had ever done before in a very particularway indeedharriet could not recall it without a blush.
he seemedto be almost asking her whether her affections were engaged.but as soon as she miss woodhouse appeared likely to join themhe changed the subject and began talking about farmingthe second was his having sat talking with her nearly half an hourbefore emma came back from her visit the very last morning of hisbeing at hartfieldthough when he first came in he had saidthat he could not stay five minutesand his having told herduring their conversation that though he must go to londonit was very much against his inclination that he left home at allwhich was much more as emma felt than he had acknowledged to her.the superior degree of confidence towards harriet which this onearticle marked gave her severe pain.on the subject of the first of the two circumstances she didafter a little reflection venture the following question.might he notis not it possible that when enquiring as you thoughtinto the state of your affections he might be alluding to mr. martinhe might have mr. martins interest in view  but harriet rejectedthe suspicion with spirit.mr.
martin  no indeedthere was not a hint of mr. martin.i hope i know better now than to care for mr. martin or to besuspected of it.when harriet had closed her evidence she appealed to her dearmiss woodhouse to say whether she had not good ground for hope.i never should have presumed to think of it at first said shebut for you.
you told me to observe him carefully and lethis behaviour be the rule of mineand so i have.
but now i seemto feel that i may deserve him and that if he does chuse meit will not be any thing so very wonderful.the bitter feelings occasioned by this speech the many bitterfeelings made the utmost exertion necessary on emmas sideto enable her to say on replyharriet i will only venture to declare that mr. knightley isthe last man in the world who would intentionally give any womanthe idea of his feeling for her more than he really does.harriet seemed ready to worship her friend for a sentence so satisfactoryand emma was only saved from raptures and fondness which atthat moment would have been dreadful penance by the sound of herfathers footsteps.
he was coming through the hall.
harriet wastoo much agitated to encounter him.
she could not compose herselfmr.
woodhouse would be alarmedshe had better gowith most readyencouragement from her friend therefore she passed off throughanother doorand the moment she was gone this was the spontaneousburst of emmas feelings  oh god that i had never seen herthe rest of the day the following night were hardly enoughfor her thoughts.she was bewildered amidst the confusionof all that had rushed on her within the last few hours.every moment had brought a fresh surprize and every surprizemust be matter of humiliation to her.how to understand it allhow to understand the deceptions she had been thus practisingon herself and living underthe blunders the blindness of herown head and heartshe sat still she walked about she tried herown room she tried the shrubberyin every place every postureshe perceived that she had acted most weakly that she had been imposedon by others in a most mortifying degree that she had been imposingon herself in a degree yet more mortifying that she was wretchedand should probably find this day but the beginning of wretchedness.to understand thoroughly understand her own heart was thefirst endeavour.
to that point went every leisure moment which herfathers claims on her allowed and every moment of involuntaryabsence of mind.how long had mr. knightley been so dear to her as every feelingdeclared him now to be  when had his influence such influence begunwhen had he succeeded to that place in her affection which frankchurchill had once for a short period occupiedshe looked backshe compared the twocompared them as they had always stood inher estimation from the time of the latters becoming known to herand as they must at any time have been compared by her had itoh had it by any blessed felicity occurred to her to institutethe comparison.she saw that there never had been a time when shedid not consider mr. knightley as infinitely the superior or whenhis regard for her had not been infinitely the most dear.
she sawthat in persuading herself in fancying in acting to the contraryshe had been entirely under a delusion totally ignorant of herown heartand in short that she had never really cared for frankchurchill at allthis was the conclusion of the first series of reflection.this was the knowledge of herself on the first question of inquirywhich she reached and without being long in reaching it.she was most sorrowfully indignant ashamed of every sensationbut the one revealed to herher affection for mr. knightley.every other part of her mind was disgusting.with insufferable vanity had she believed herself in the secret of everybodys feelings with unpardonable arrogance proposed to arrange everybodys destiny.
she was proved to have been universally mistakenand she had not quite done nothingfor she had done mischief.she had brought evil on harriet on herself and she too much fearedon mr. knightley.were this most unequal of all connexions totake place on her must rest all the reproach of having given ita beginning for his attachment she must believe to be produced onlyby a consciousness of harrietsand even were this not the casehe would never have known harriet at all but for her folly.mr.
knightley and harriet smithit was a union to distance everywonder of the kind.the attachment of frank churchill and janefairfax became commonplace threadbare stale in the comparisonexciting no surprize presenting no disparity affording nothingto be said or thought.mr.
knightley and harriet smithsuch anelevation on her side  such a debasement on his  it was horribleto emma to think how it must sink him in the general opinionto foresee the smiles the sneers the merriment it would prompt athis expense the mortification and disdain of his brother the thousandinconveniences to himself.could it beno it was impossible.and yet it was far very far from impossible.was it a newcircumstance for a man of firstrate abilities to be captivated byvery inferior powers  was it new for one perhaps too busy to seekto be the prize of a girl who would seek himwas it new for anything in this world to be unequal inconsistent incongruousor forchance and circumstance as second causes to direct the human fateoh had she never brought harriet forward  had she left her whereshe ought and where he had told her she oughthad she notwith a folly which no tongue could express prevented her marryingthe unexceptionable young man who would have made her happyand respectable in the line of life to which she ought to belongall would have been safe none of this dreadful sequel would have been.how harriet could ever have had the presumption to raiseher thoughts to mr. knightleyhow she could dare to fancyherself the chosen of such a man till actually assured of itbut harriet was less humble had fewer scruples than formerly.her inferiority whether of mind or situation seemed little felt.she had seemed more sensible of mr. eltons being to stoopin marrying her than she now seemed of mr. knightleys.alas was not that her own doing too  who had been at pains to giveharriet notions of selfconsequence but herselfwho but herselfhad taught her that she was to elevate herself if possibleand that her claims were great to a high worldly establishmentif harriet from being humble were grown vain it was her doing too.chapter xiitill now that she was threatened with its loss emma had never knownhow much of her happiness depended on being first with mr. knightleyfirst in interest and affection.satisfied that it was soand feeling it her due she had enjoyed it without reflectionand only in the dread of being supplanted found how inexpressiblyimportant it had been.long very long she felt she had been firstfor having no female connexions of his own there had beenonly isabella whose claims could be compared with hers and shehad always known exactly how far he loved and esteemed isabella.she had herself been first with him for many years past.she had not deserved it she had often been negligent or perverseslighting his advice or even wilfully opposing him insensible ofhalf his merits and quarrelling with him because he would notacknowledge her false and insolent estimate of her ownbut stillfrom family attachment and habit and thorough excellence of mindhe had loved her and watched over her from a girl with an endeavourto improve her and an anxiety for her doing right which noother creature had at all shared.
in spite of all her faultsshe knew she was dear to him might she not say very dearwhen the suggestions of hope however which must follow herepresented themselves she could not presume to indulge them.harriet smith might think herself not unworthy of being peculiarlyexclusively passionately loved by mr. knightley.
she could not.she could not flatter herself with any idea of blindness in his attachmentto her.
she had received a very recent proof of its impartiality.how shocked had he been by her behaviour to miss bates  how directlyhow strongly had he expressed himself to her on the subjectnot toostrongly for the offencebut far far too strongly to issue fromany feeling softer than upright justice and clearsighted goodwill.she had no hope nothing to deserve the name of hope that he couldhave that sort of affection for herself which was now in questionbut there was a hope at times a slight one at times much strongerthat harriet might have deceived herself and be overrating hisregard for her.wish it she must for his sakebe the consequencenothing to herself but his remaining single all his life.could she be secure of that indeed of his never marrying at allshe believed she should be perfectly satisfied.let him but continuethe same mr. knightley to her and her father the same mr. knightleyto all the world let donwell and hartfield lose none of theirprecious intercourse of friendship and confidence and her peacewould be fully secured.marriage in fact would not do for her.it would be incompatible with what she owed to her father and withwhat she felt for him.
nothing should separate her from her father.she would not marry even if she were asked by mr. knightley.it must be her ardent wish that harriet might be disappointedand she hoped that when able to see them together again she might atleast be able to ascertain what the chances for it were.she shouldsee them henceforward with the closest observance and wretchedlyas she had hitherto misunderstood even those she was watchingshe did not know how to admit that she could be blinded here.he was expected back every day.
the power of observation would besoon givenfrightfully soon it appeared when her thoughts were inone course.
in the meanwhile she resolved against seeing harriet.it would do neither of them good it would do the subject no goodto be talking of it farther.she was resolved not to be convincedas long as she could doubt and yet had no authority for opposingharriets confidence.
to talk would be only to irritate.she wroteto her therefore kindly but decisively to beg that she would notat present come to hartfield acknowledging it to be her convictionthat all farther confidential discussion of one topic had betterbe avoided and hoping that if a few days were allowed to pass beforethey met again except in the company of othersshe objected onlyto a teteatetethey might be able to act as if they had forgottenthe conversation of yesterday.harriet submitted and approvedand was grateful.this point was just arranged when a visitor arrived to tear emmasthoughts a little from the one subject which had engrossed themsleeping or waking the last twentyfour hoursmrs.
weston who hadbeen calling on her daughterinlaw elect and took hartfield in herway home almost as much in duty to emma as in pleasure to herselfto relate all the particulars of so interesting an interview.mr.
weston had accompanied her to mrs. batess and gone through hisshare of this essential attention most handsomely but she havingthen induced miss fairfax to join her in an airing was now returnedwith much more to say and much more to say with satisfactionthan a quarter of an hour spent in mrs. batess parlour with allthe encumbrance of awkward feelings could have afforded.a little curiosity emma had and she made the most of it whileher friend related.
mrs. weston had set off to pay the visitin a good deal of agitation herself and in the first place hadwished not to go at all at present to be allowed merely to writeto miss fairfax instead and to defer this ceremonious call tilla little time had passed and mr. churchill could be reconciledto the engagements becoming known as considering every thingshe thought such a visit could not be paid without leading to reportsbut mr. weston had thought differently he was extremely anxiousto shew his approbation to miss fairfax and her family and did notconceive that any suspicion could be excited by it or if it werethat it would be of any consequence for such things he observedalways got about.
emma smiled and felt that mr. weston hadvery good reason for saying so.
they had gone in shortand verygreat had been the evident distress and confusion of the lady.she had hardly been able to speak a word and every look and actionhad shewn how deeply she was suffering from consciousness.
the quietheartfelt satisfaction of the old lady and the rapturous delightof her daughterwho proved even too joyous to talk as usualhad been a gratifying yet almost an affecting scene.
they wereboth so truly respectable in their happiness so disinterestedin every sensation thought so much of jane so much of every bodyand so little of themselves that every kindly feeling was at workfor them.
miss fairfaxs recent illness had offered a fair pleafor mrs. weston to invite her to an airing she had drawn back anddeclined at first but on being pressed had yielded and in thecourse of their drive mrs. weston had by gentle encouragementovercome so much of her embarrassment as to bring her to converseon the important subject.
apologies for her seemingly ungracioussilence in their first reception and the warmest expressions of thegratitude she was always feeling towards herself and mr. westonmust necessarily open the cause but when these effusions were put bythey had talked a good deal of the present and of the future stateof the engagement.
mrs. weston was convinced that such conversationmust be the greatest relief to her companion pent up within her ownmind as every thing had so long been and was very much pleasedwith all that she had said on the subject.on the misery of what she had suffered during the concealmentof so many months continued mrs. weston she was energetic.this was one of her expressions.
i will not say that since ientered into the engagement i have not had some happy moments but ican say that i have never known the blessing of one tranquil hourand the quivering lip emma which uttered it was an attestationthat i felt at my heart.poor girl said emma.
she thinks herself wrong then for havingconsented to a private engagementwrong  no one i believe can blame her more than she is disposedto blame herself.
the consequence said she has been a stateof perpetual suffering to me and so it ought.
but after all thepunishment that misconduct can bring it is still not less misconduct.pain is no expiation.
i never can be blameless.
i have been actingcontrary to all my sense of right and the fortunate turn that everything has taken and the kindness i am now receiving is what myconscience tells me ought not to be.
do not imagine madamshe continued that i was taught wrong.
do not let any reflectionfall on the principles or the care of the friends who broughtme up.
the error has been all my own and i do assure you thatwith all the excuse that present circumstances may appear to givei shall yet dread making the story known to colonel campbell.poor girl said emma again.
she loves him then excessivelyi suppose.
it must have been from attachment only that she couldbe led to form the engagement.
her affection must have overpoweredher judgment.yes i have no doubt of her being extremely attached to him.i am afraid returned emma sighing that i must often havecontributed to make her unhappy.on your side my love it was very innocently done.
but sheprobably had something of that in her thoughts when alludingto the misunderstandings which he had given us hints of before.one natural consequence of the evil she had involved herself inshe said was that of making her unreasonable.
the consciousnessof having done amiss had exposed her to a thousand inquietudesand made her captious and irritable to a degree that must have beenthat had beenhard for him to bear.
i did not make the allowancessaid she which i ought to have done for his temper and spiritshis delightful spirits and that gaiety that playfulnessof disposition which under any other circumstances would i am surehave been as constantly bewitching to me as they were at first.she then began to speak of you and of the great kindness youhad shewn her during her illness and with a blush which shewed mehow it was all connected desired me whenever i had an opportunityto thank youi could not thank you too muchfor every wish andevery endeavour to do her good.
she was sensible that you had neverreceived any proper acknowledgment from herself.if i did not know her to be happy now said emma seriouslywhich in spite of every little drawback from her scrupulousconscience she must be i could not bear these thanksfor ohmrs.
weston if there were an account drawn up of the eviland the good i have done miss fairfaxwell checking herselfand trying to be more lively this is all to be forgotten.you are very kind to bring me these interesting particulars.they shew her to the greatest advantage.
i am sure she is very goodi hope she will be very happy.
it is fit that the fortuneshould be on his side for i think the merit will be all on hers.such a conclusion could not pass unanswered by mrs. weston.she thought well of frank in almost every respect and what was moreshe loved him very much and her defence was therefore earnest.she talked with a great deal of reason and at least equal affectionbut she had too much to urge for emmas attention it was soon goneto brunswick square or to donwell she forgot to attempt to listenand when mrs. weston ended with we have not yet had the letterwe are so anxious for you know but i hope it will soon comeshe was obliged to pause before she answered and at last obligedto answer at random before she could at all recollect what letter itwas which they were so anxious for.are you well my emma was mrs. westons parting question.oh perfectly.
i am always well you know.
be sure to give meintelligence of the letter as soon as possible.mrs.
westons communications furnished emma with more food forunpleasant reflection by increasing her esteem and compassionand her sense of past injustice towards miss fairfax.
she bitterlyregretted not having sought a closer acquaintance with her and blushedfor the envious feelings which had certainly been in some measurethe cause.
had she followed mr. knightleys known wishes in payingthat attention to miss fairfax which was every way her due had shetried to know her better had she done her part towards intimacyhad she endeavoured to find a friend there instead of in harriet smithshe must in all probability have been spared from every painwhich pressed on her now.birth abilities and educationhad been equally marking one as an associate for her to be receivedwith gratitude and the otherwhat was shesupposing even thatthey had never become intimate friends that she had never beenadmitted into miss fairfaxs confidence on this important matterwhich was most probablestill in knowing her as she oughtand as she might she must have been preserved from the abominablesuspicions of an improper attachment to mr. dixon which she hadnot only so foolishly fashioned and harboured herself but had sounpardonably imparted an idea which she greatly feared had been madea subject of material distress to the delicacy of janes feelingsby the levity or carelessness of frank churchills.
of all the sourcesof evil surrounding the former since her coming to highburyshe was persuaded that she must herself have been the worst.she must have been a perpetual enemy.
they never could have beenall three together without her having stabbed jane fairfaxs peacein a thousand instances and on box hill perhaps it had beenthe agony of a mind that would bear no more.the evening of this day was very long and melancholy at hartfield.the weather added what it could of gloom.
a cold stormy rain set inand nothing of july appeared but in the trees and shrubs which thewind was despoiling and the length of the day which only madesuch cruel sights the longer visible.the weather affected mr. woodhouse and he could only be kept tolerablycomfortable by almost ceaseless attention on his daughters sideand by exertions which had never cost her half so much before.it reminded her of their first forlorn teteatete on the eveningof mrs. westons weddingday but mr. knightley had walkedin then soon after tea and dissipated every melancholy fancy.alas such delightful proofs of hartfields attraction as thosesort of visits conveyed might shortly be over.
the picture whichshe had then drawn of the privations of the approaching winterhad proved erroneous no friends had deserted them no pleasureshad been lost.but her present forebodings she feared wouldexperience no similar contradiction.
the prospect before her nowwas threatening to a degree that could not be entirely dispelledthat might not be even partially brightened.
if all took placethat might take place among the circle of her friends hartfield mustbe comparatively deserted and she left to cheer her father with thespirits only of ruined happiness.the child to be born at randalls must be a tie there even dearerthan herself and mrs. westons heart and time would be occupiedby it.
they should lose her and probably in great measureher husband also.frank churchill would return among them no moreand miss fairfax it was reasonable to suppose would soon ceaseto belong to highbury.
they would be married and settled eitherat or near enscombe.
all that were good would be withdrawn and ifto these losses the loss of donwell were to be added what wouldremain of cheerful or of rational society within their reachmr.
knightley to be no longer coming there for his evening comfortno longer walking in at all hours as if ever willing to changehis own home for theirshow was it to be endured  and if he wereto be lost to them for harriets sake if he were to be thoughtof hereafter as finding in harriets society all that he wantedif harriet were to be the chosen the first the dearest the friendthe wife to whom he looked for all the best blessings of existencewhat could be increasing emmas wretchedness but the reflection never fardistant from her mind that it had been all her own workwhen it came to such a pitch as this she was not able to refrainfrom a start or a heavy sigh or even from walking about the roomfor a few secondsand the only source whence any thing like consolationor composure could be drawn was in the resolution of her ownbetter conduct and the hope that however inferior in spirit andgaiety might be the following and every future winter of her lifeto the past it would yet find her more rational more acquaintedwith herself and leave her less to regret when it were gone.chapter xiiithe weather continued much the same all the following morningand the same loneliness and the same melancholy seemed toreign at hartfieldbut in the afternoon it cleared the windchanged into a softer quarter the clouds were carried offthe sun appeared it was summer again.
with all the eagernesswhich such a transition gives emma resolved to be out of doorsas soon as possible.
never had the exquisite sight smellsensation of nature tranquil warm and brilliant after a stormbeen more attractive to her.
she longed for the serenity they mightgradually introduce and on mr. perrys coming in soon after dinnerwith a disengaged hour to give her father she lost no time illhurrying into the shrubbery.there with spirits freshenedand thoughts a little relieved she had taken a few turns when shesaw mr. knightley passing through the garden door and comingtowards her.it was the first intimation of his being returnedfrom london.
she had been thinking of him the moment beforeas unquestionably sixteen miles distant.there was time only forthe quickest arrangement of mind.
she must be collected and calm.in half a minute they were together.
the how dye dos were quietand constrained on each side.
she asked after their mutual friendsthey were all well.when had he left themonly that morning.he must have had a wet ride.yes.he meant to walk with hershe found.
he had just looked into the diningroom and as hewas not wanted there preferred being out of doors.she thoughthe neither looked nor spoke cheerfully and the first possiblecause for it suggested by her fears was that he had perhaps beencommunicating his plans to his brother and was pained by the mannerin which they had been received.they walked together.
he was silent.
she thought he was oftenlooking at her and trying for a fuller view of her face than itsuited her to give.
and this belief produced another dread.perhaps he wanted to speak to her of his attachment to harriethe might be watching for encouragement to begin.she did notcould not feel equal to lead the way to any such subject.he must do it all himself.
yet she could not bear this silence.with him it was most unnatural.
she consideredresolvedand tryingto smile beganyou have some news to hear now you are come back that will rathersurprize you.have i said he quietly and looking at her of what natureoh the best nature in the worlda wedding.after waiting a moment as if to be sure she intended to say no morehe repliedif you mean miss fairfax and frank churchill i have heardthat already.how is it possible cried emma turning her glowing cheekstowards him for while she spoke it occurred to her that hemight have called at mrs. goddards in his way.i had a few lines on parish business from mr. weston this morningand at the end of them he gave me a brief account of what had happened.emma was quite relieved and could presently say with a littlemore composureyou probably have been less surprized than any of us for you havehad your suspicions.i have not forgotten that you once tried to giveme a caution.i wish i had attended to itbutwith a sinkingvoice and a heavy sigh i seem to have been doomed to blindness.for a moment or two nothing was said and she was unsuspiciousof having excited any particular interest till she found her armdrawn within his and pressed against his heart and heard himthus saying in a tone of great sensibility speaking lowtime my dearest emma time will heal the wound.your ownexcellent senseyour exertions for your fathers sakei knowyou will not allow yourself.
her arm was pressed againas he added in a more broken and subdued accent the feelingsof the warmest friendshipindignationabominable scoundreland in a louder steadier tone he concluded with he will soonbe gone.
they will soon be in yorkshire.
i am sorry for her.she deserves a better fate.emma understood him and as soon as she could recover from theflutter of pleasure excited by such tender consideration repliedyou are very kindbut you are mistakenand i must set you right.i am not in want of that sort of compassion.
my blindness to whatwas going on led me to act by them in a way that i must alwaysbe ashamed of and i was very foolishly tempted to say and do manythings which may well lay me open to unpleasant conjectures but ihave no other reason to regret that i was not in the secret earlier.emma cried he looking eagerly at her are you indeedbut checking himselfno no i understand youforgive mei ampleased that you can say even so much.he is no object of regretindeed and it will not be very long i hope before that becomesthe acknowledgment of more than your reason.fortunate that youraffections were not farther entangledi could never i confessfrom your manners assure myself as to the degree of what you felti could only be certain that there was a preferenceand a preferencewhich i never believed him to deserve.he is a disgrace to the nameof man.and is he to be rewarded with that sweet young womanjane jane you will be a miserable creature.mr.
knightley said emma trying to be lively but really confusedi am in a very extraordinary situation.
i cannot let you continue inyour error and yet perhaps since my manners gave such an impressioni have as much reason to be ashamed of confessing that i never havebeen at all attached to the person we are speaking of as it mightbe natural for a woman to feel in confessing exactly the reverse.but i never have.he listened in perfect silence.
she wished him to speak but hewould not.
she supposed she must say more before she were entitledto his clemency but it was a hard case to be obliged still to lowerherself in his opinion.
she went on however.i have very little to say for my own conduct.i was temptedby his attentions and allowed myself to appear pleased.an old story probablya common caseand no more than has happenedto hundreds of my sex before and yet it may not be the more excusablein one who sets up as i do for understanding.
many circumstancesassisted the temptation.
he was the son of mr. westonhe wascontinually herei always found him very pleasantand in shortfor with a sigh let me swell out the causes ever so ingeniouslythey all centre in this at lastmy vanity was flattered and iallowed his attentions.
latterly howeverfor some time indeedi have had no idea of their meaning any thing.i thought thema habit a trick nothing that called for seriousness on my side.he has imposed on me but he has not injured me.
i have never beenattached to him.
and now i can tolerably comprehend his behaviour.he never wished to attach me.
it was merely a blind to concealhis real situation with another.it was his object to blindall about him and no one i am sure could be more effectuallyblinded than myselfexcept that i was not blindedthat it was mygood fortunethat in short i was somehow or other safe from him.she had hoped for an answer herefor a few words to say that herconduct was at least intelligible but he was silent and as faras she could judge deep in thought.
at last and tolerablyin his usual tone he saidi have never had a high opinion of frank churchill.i can supposehowever that i may have underrated him.
my acquaintance withhim has been but trifling.and even if i have not underratedhim hitherto he may yet turn out well.with such a woman he hasa chance.i have no motive for wishing him illand for her sakewhose happiness will be involved in his good character and conducti shall certainly wish him well.i have no doubt of their being happy together said emmai believe them to be very mutually and very sincerely attached.he is a most fortunate man returned mr. knightley with energy.so early in lifeat threeandtwentya period when if a manchuses a wife he generally chuses ill.  at threeandtwentyto have drawn such a prize  what years of felicity that manin all human calculation has before himassured of the love ofsuch a womanthe disinterested love for jane fairfaxs charactervouches for her disinterestedness every thing in his favourequality of situationi mean as far as regards society and all thehabits and manners that are important equality in every point but oneand that one since the purity of her heart is not to be doubtedsuch as must increase his felicity for it will be his to bestow theonly advantages she wants.a man would always wish to give a womana better home than the one he takes her from and he who can do itwhere there is no doubt of her regard must i think be the happiestof mortals.frank churchill is indeed the favourite of fortune.every thing turns out for his good.he meets with a young womanat a wateringplace gains her affection cannot even weary herby negligent treatmentand had he and all his family sought roundthe world for a perfect wife for him they could not have foundher superior.his aunt is in the way.his aunt dies.he hasonly to speak.his friends are eager to promote his happiness.he had used every body illand they are all delighted to forgive him.he is a fortunate man indeedyou speak as if you envied him.and i do envy him emma.
in one respect he is the object of my envy.emma could say no more.
they seemed to be within half a sentenceof harriet and her immediate feeling was to avert the subjectif possible.
she made her plan she would speak of somethingtotally differentthe children in brunswick square and sheonly waited for breath to begin when mr. knightley startled herby sayingyou will not ask me what is the point of envy.you are determinedi see to have no curiosity.you are wisebut i cannot be wise.emma i must tell you what you will not ask though i may wish itunsaid the next moment.oh then dont speak it dont speak it she eagerly cried.take a little time consider do not commit yourself.thank you said he in an accent of deep mortification and notanother syllable followed.emma could not bear to give him pain.
he was wishing to confide in herperhaps to consult hercost her what it would she would listen.she might assist his resolution or reconcile him to itshe might give just praise to harriet or by representing to himhis own independence relieve him from that state of indecisionwhich must be more intolerable than any alternative to such a mindas his.they had reached the house.you are going in i suppose said he.noreplied emmaquite confirmed by the depressed mannerin which he still spokei should like to take another turn.mr.
perry is not gone.
and after proceeding a few steps she addedi stopped you ungraciously just now mr. knightley and i am afraidgave you pain.but if you have any wish to speak openly to meas a friend or to ask my opinion of any thing that you may havein contemplationas a friend indeed you may command me.i willhear whatever you like.
i will tell you exactly what i think.as a friendrepeated mr. knightley.emma that i fear isa wordno i have no wishstay yes why should i hesitatei have gone too far already for concealment.emma i accept your offerextraordinary as it may seem i accept it and refer myself to youas a friend.tell me then have i no chance of ever succeedinghe stopped in his earnestness to look the question and the expressionof his eyes overpowered her.my dearest emma said he for dearest you will always bewhatever the event of this hours conversation my dearestmost beloved emmatell me at once.
say no if it is to be said.she could really say nothing.you are silent he criedwith great animation absolutely silent at present i ask no more.emma was almost ready to sink under the agitation of this moment.the dread of being awakened from the happiest dream was perhapsthe most prominent feeling.i cannot make speeches emma  he soon resumed and in a toneof such sincere decided intelligible tenderness as wastolerably convincing.if i loved you less i might be ableto talk about it more.
but you know what i am.you hear nothingbut truth from me.i have blamed you and lectured you and youhave borne it as no other woman in england would have borne it.bear with the truths i would tell you now dearest emma as well asyou have borne with them.
the manner perhaps may have as littleto recommend them.
god knows i have been a very indifferent lover.but you understand me.yes you see you understand my feelingsand will return them if you can.
at present i ask only to hearonce to hear your voice.while he spoke emmas mind was most busy and with all the wonderfulvelocity of thought had been ableand yet without losing a wordto catch and comprehend the exact truth of the whole to see thatharriets hopes had been entirely groundless a mistake a delusionas complete a delusion as any of her ownthat harriet was nothingthat she was every thing herself that what she had been sayingrelative to harriet had been all taken as the language of herown feelings and that her agitation her doubts her reluctanceher discouragement had been all received as discouragementfrom herself.and not only was there time for these convictionswith all their glow of attendant happiness there was time also torejoice that harriets secret had not escaped her and to resolvethat it need not and should not.it was all the service she couldnow render her poor friend for as to any of that heroism of sentimentwhich might have prompted her to entreat him to transfer his affectionfrom herself to harriet as infinitely the most worthy of the twoor even the more simple sublimity of resolving to refuse himat once and for ever without vouchsafing any motive because hecould not marry them both emma had it not.
she felt for harrietwith pain and with contrition but no flight of generosity run madopposing all that could be probable or reasonable entered her brain.she had led her friend astray and it would be a reproach toher for ever but her judgment was as strong as her feelingsand as strong as it had ever been before in reprobating any suchalliance for him as most unequal and degrading.
her way was clearthough not quite smooth.she spoke then on being so entreated.what did she sayjust what she ought of course.
a lady always does.she said enough to shew there need not be despairand to invite himto say more himself.
he had despaired at one period he had receivedsuch an injunction to caution and silence as for the time crushedevery hopeshe had begun by refusing to hear him.the change hadperhaps been somewhat suddenher proposal of taking another turnher renewing the conversation which she had just put an end tomight be a little extraordinaryshe felt its inconsistencybut mr. knightley was so obliging as to put up with it and seek nofarther explanation.seldom very seldom does complete truth belong to any human disclosureseldom can it happen that something is not a little disguisedor a little mistaken but where as in this case though the conductis mistaken the feelings are not it may not be very material.mr.
knightley could not impute to emma a more relenting heart thanshe possessed or a heart more disposed to accept of his.he had in fact been wholly unsuspicious of his own influence.he had followed her into the shrubbery with no idea of trying it.he had come in his anxiety to see how she bore frank churchillsengagement with no selfish view no view at all but of endeavouringif she allowed him an opening to soothe or to counsel her.the resthad been the work of the moment the immediate effect of what he heardon his feelings.
the delightful assurance of her total indifferencetowards frank churchill of her having a heart completely disengagedfrom him had given birth to the hope that in time he might gainher affection himselfbut it had been no present hopehe had onlyin the momentary conquest of eagerness over judgment aspired to betold that she did not forbid his attempt to attach her.the superiorhopes which gradually opened were so much the more enchanting.the affection which he had been asking to be allowed to createif he could was already hiswithin half an hour he had passedfrom a thoroughly distressed state of mind to something so likeperfect happiness that it could bear no other name.her change was equal.this one halfhour had given to each thesame precious certainty of being beloved had cleared from eachthe same degree of ignorance jealousy or distrust.on his sidethere had been a longstanding jealousy old as the arrivalor even the expectation of frank churchill.he had been in lovewith emma and jealous of frank churchill from about the same periodone sentiment having probably enlightened him as to the other.it was his jealousy of frank churchill that had taken him fromthe country.the box hill party had decided him on going away.he would save himself from witnessing again such permittedencouraged attentions.he had gone to learn to be indifferent.but he had gone to a wrong place.
there was too much domestichappiness in his brothers house woman wore too amiable a form in itisabella was too much like emmadiffering only in those strikinginferiorities which always brought the other in brilliancy before himfor much to have been done even had his time been longer.he hadstayed on however vigorously day after daytill this very morningspost had conveyed the history of jane fairfax.then with thegladness which must be felt nay which he did not scruple to feelhaving never believed frank churchill to be at all deserving emmawas there so much fond solicitude so much keen anxiety for herthat he could stay no longer.
he had ridden home through the rainand had walked up directly after dinner to see how this sweetestand best of all creatures faultless in spite of all her faultsbore the discovery.he had found her agitated and low.frank churchill was a villain.he heard her declare that she had never loved him.
frank churchillscharacter was not desperate.she was his own emma by hand and wordwhen they returned into the house and if he could have thoughtof frank churchill then he might have deemed him a very good sortof fellow.chapter xivwhat totally different feelings did emma take back into the housefrom what she had brought outshe had then been only daring to hopefor a little respite of sufferingshe was now in an exquisiteflutter of happiness and such happiness moreover as she believedmust still be greater when the flutter should have passed away.they sat down to teathe same party round the same tablehow often it had been collectedand how often had her eyes fallenon the same shrubs in the lawn and observed the same beautifuleffect of the western sunbut never in such a state of spiritsnever in any thing like it and it was with difficulty that she couldsummon enough of her usual self to be the attentive lady of the houseor even the attentive daughter.poor mr. woodhouse little suspected what was plotting against himin the breast of that man whom he was so cordially welcoming and soanxiously hoping might not have taken cold from his ride.could hehave seen the heart he would have cared very little for the lungsbut without the most distant imagination of the impending evilwithout the slightest perception of any thing extraordinary inthe looks or ways of either he repeated to them very comfortablyall the articles of news he had received from mr. perry and talkedon with much selfcontentment totally unsuspicious of what theycould have told him in return.as long as mr. knightley remained with them emmas fever continuedbut when he was gone she began to be a little tranquillisedand subduedand in the course of the sleepless night which wasthe tax for such an evening she found one or two such very seriouspoints to consider as made her feel that even her happinessmust have some alloy.
her fatherand harriet.
she could not bealone without feeling the full weight of their separate claimsand how to guard the comfort of both to the utmost was the question.with respect to her father it was a question soon answered.she hardly knew yet what mr. knightley would ask but a very shortparley with her own heart produced the most solemn resolutionof never quitting her father.she even wept over the idea of itas a sin of thought.
while he lived it must be only an engagementbut she flattered herself that if divested of the danger ofdrawing her away it might become an increase of comfort to him.how to do her best by harriet was of more difficult decisionhow to spare her from any unnecessary pain how to makeher any possible atonement how to appear least her enemyon these subjects her perplexity and distress were very greatand her mind had to pass again and again through every bitterreproach and sorrowful regret that had ever surrounded it.she could only resolve at last that she would still avoid ameeting with her and communicate all that need be told by letterthat it would be inexpressibly desirable to have her removed justnow for a time from highbury andindulging in one scheme morenearly resolve that it might be practicable to get an invitationfor her to brunswick square.isabella had been pleased with harrietand a few weeks spent in london must give her some amusement.she did not think it in harriets nature to escape being benefitedby novelty and variety by the streets the shops and the children.at any rate it would be a proof of attention and kindness in herselffrom whom every thing was due a separation for the present an avertingof the evil day when they must all be together again.she rose early and wrote her letter to harriet an employmentwhich left her so very serious so nearly sad that mr. knightleyin walking up to hartfield to breakfast did not arrive at all too soonand half an hour stolen afterwards to go over the same ground againwith him literally and figuratively was quite necessary to reinstateher in a proper share of the happiness of the evening before.he had not left her long by no means long enough for her to havethe slightest inclination for thinking of any body else when a letterwas brought her from randallsa very thick lettershe guessedwhat it must contain and deprecated the necessity of reading it.she was now in perfect charity with frank churchill she wantedno explanations she wanted only to have her thoughts to herselfand as for understanding any thing he wrote she was sure she wasincapable of it.it must be waded through however.
she openedthe packet it was too surely soa note from mrs. weston to herselfushered in the letter from frank to mrs. weston.i have the greatest pleasure my dear emma in forwardingto you the enclosed.
i know what thorough justice you willdo it and have scarcely a doubt of its happy effect.i thinkwe shall never materially disagree about the writer againbut i will not delay you by a long preface.we are quite well.this letter has been the cure of all the little nervousness i havebeen feeling lately.i did not quite like your looks on tuesdaybut it was an ungenial morning and though you will never own beingaffected by weather i think every body feels a northeast wind.i felt for your dear father very much in the storm of tuesdayafternoon and yesterday morning but had the comfort of hearinglast night by mr. perry that it had not made him ill.                              yours ever                                                       a. w.                       to mrs. weston.
windsorjuly.my dear madamif i made myself intelligible yesterday this letter will be expectedbut expected or not i know it will be read with candour and indulgence.you are all goodness and i believe there will be need of evenall your goodness to allow for some parts of my past conduct.but i have been forgiven by one who had still more to resent.my courage rises while i write.
it is very difficult for theprosperous to be humble.
i have already met with such successin two applications for pardon that i may be in danger of thinkingmyself too sure of yours and of those among your friends who havehad any ground of offence.you must all endeavour to comprehendthe exact nature of my situation when i first arrived at randallsyou must consider me as having a secret which was to be keptat all hazards.
this was the fact.
my right to place myselfin a situation requiring such concealment is another question.i shall not discuss it here.
for my temptation to think it a righti refer every caviller to a brick house sashed windows belowand casements above in highbury.
i dared not address her openlymy difficulties in the then state of enscombe must be too wellknown to require definition and i was fortunate enough to prevailbefore we parted at weymouth and to induce the most upright femalemind in the creation to stoop in charity to a secret engagement.had she refused i should have gone mad.but you will be ready to saywhat was your hope in doing thiswhat did you look forward toto any thing every thingto time chance circumstance slow effectssudden bursts perseverance and weariness health and sickness.every possibility of good was before me and the first of blessingssecured in obtaining her promises of faith and correspondence.if you need farther explanation i have the honour my dear madamof being your husbands son and the advantage of inheritinga disposition to hope for good which no inheritance of housesor lands can ever equal the value of.see me then under thesecircumstances arriving on my first visit to randallsand here iam conscious of wrong for that visit might have been sooner paid.you will look back and see that i did not come till miss fairfaxwas in highbury and as you were the person slighted you willforgive me instantly but i must work on my fathers compassionby reminding him that so long as i absented myself from his houseso long i lost the blessing of knowing you.
my behaviourduring the very happy fortnight which i spent with you did noti hope lay me open to reprehension excepting on one point.and now i come to the principal the only important part of myconduct while belonging to you which excites my own anxietyor requires very solicitous explanation.
with the greatest respectand the warmest friendship do i mention miss woodhouse my fatherperhaps will think i ought to add with the deepest humiliation.a few words which dropped from him yesterday spoke his opinionand some censure i acknowledge myself liable to.my behaviourto miss woodhouse indicated i believe more than it ought.in order to assist a concealment so essential to me i was ledon to make more than an allowable use of the sort of intimacyinto which we were immediately thrown.i cannot deny that misswoodhouse was my ostensible objectbut i am sure you will believethe declaration that had i not been convinced of her indifferencei would not have been induced by any selfish views to go on.amiable and delightful as miss woodhouse is she never gave methe idea of a young woman likely to be attached and that she wasperfectly free from any tendency to being attached to me was as muchmy conviction as my wish.she received my attentions with an easyfriendly goodhumoured playfulness which exactly suited me.we seemed to understand each other.
from our relative situationthose attentions were her due and were felt to be so.whether misswoodhouse began really to understand me before the expiration ofthat fortnight i cannot saywhen i called to take leave of heri remember that i was within a moment of confessing the truthand i then fancied she was not without suspicion but i have nodoubt of her having since detected me at least in some degree.she may not have surmised the whole but her quickness musthave penetrated a part.
i cannot doubt it.
you will findwhenever the subject becomes freed from its present restraintsthat it did not take her wholly by surprize.
she frequently gaveme hints of it.
i remember her telling me at the ball that iowed mrs. elton gratitude for her attentions to miss fairfax.i hope this history of my conduct towards her will be admittedby you and my father as great extenuation of what you saw amiss.while you considered me as having sinned against emma woodhousei could deserve nothing from either.
acquit me here and procurefor me when it is allowable the acquittal and good wishes of thatsaid emma woodhouse whom i regard with so much brotherly affectionas to long to have her as deeply and as happily in love as myself.whatever strange things i said or did during that fortnight you havenow a key to.
my heart was in highbury and my business was to getmy body thither as often as might be and with the least suspicion.if you remember any queernesses set them all to the right account.of the pianoforte so much talked of i feel it only necessary to saythat its being ordered was absolutely unknown to miss f who wouldnever have allowed me to send it had any choice been given her.the delicacy of her mind throughout the whole engagementmy dear madam is much beyond my power of doing justice to.you will soon i earnestly hope know her thoroughly yourself.no description can describe her.
she must tell you herself what she isyet not by word for never was there a human creature who wouldso designedly suppress her own merit.since i began this letterwhich will be longer than i foresaw i have heard from her.she gives a good account of her own health but as she never complainsi dare not depend.
i want to have your opinion of her looks.i know you will soon call on her she is living in dread of the visit.perhaps it is paid already.
let me hear from you without delayi am impatient for a thousand particulars.
remember how fewminutes i was at randalls and in how bewildered how mad a stateand i am not much better yet still insane either from happinessor misery.
when i think of the kindness and favour i have met withof her excellence and patience and my uncles generosity i am madwith joy  but when i recollect all the uneasiness i occasioned herand how little i deserve to be forgiven i am mad with anger.if i could but see her againbut i must not propose it yet.my uncle has been too good for me to encroach.i must still addto this long letter.
you have not heard all that you ought to hear.i could not give any connected detail yesterday but the suddennessand in one light the unseasonableness with which the affair burst outneeds explanation for though the event of the th ult.
as youwill conclude immediately opened to me the happiest prospectsi should not have presumed on such early measures but from thevery particular circumstances which left me not an hour to lose.i should myself have shrunk from any thing so hasty and she would havefelt every scruple of mine with multiplied strength and refinement.but i had no choice.
the hasty engagement she had entered into withthat womanhere my dear madam i was obliged to leave off abruptlyto recollect and compose myself.i have been walking over the countryand am now i hope rational enough to make the rest of my letterwhat it ought to be.it is in fact a most mortifying retrospectfor me.
i behaved shamefully.
and here i can admit that my mannersto miss w. in being unpleasant to miss f. were highly blameable.she disapproved them which ought to have been enough.my plea ofconcealing the truth she did not think sufficient.she was displeasedi thought unreasonably so  i thought her on a thousand occasionsunnecessarily scrupulous and cautious  i thought her even cold.but she was always right.
if i had followed her judgment and subduedmy spirits to the level of what she deemed proper i should haveescaped the greatest unhappiness i have ever known.we quarrelled.do you remember the morning spent at donwellthere every littledissatisfaction that had occurred before came to a crisis.
i was latei met her walking home by herself and wanted to walk with herbut she would not suffer it.
she absolutely refused to allow mewhich i then thought most unreasonable.
now however i see nothingin it but a very natural and consistent degree of discretion.while i to blind the world to our engagement was behaving onehour with objectionable particularity to another woman was sheto be consenting the next to a proposal which might have madeevery previous caution uselesshad we been met walking togetherbetween donwell and highbury the truth must have been suspected.i was mad enough however to resent.i doubted her affection.i doubted it more the next day on box hill when provoked bysuch conduct on my side such shameful insolent neglect of herand such apparent devotion to miss w. as it would have beenimpossible for any woman of sense to endure she spoke herresentment in a form of words perfectly intelligible to me.in short my dear madam it was a quarrel blameless on her sideabominable on mine and i returned the same evening to richmondthough i might have staid with you till the next morningmerely because i would be as angry with her as possible.
even theni was not such a fool as not to mean to be reconciled in timebut i was the injured person injured by her coldness and i wentaway determined that she should make the first advances.i shallalways congratulate myself that you were not of the box hill party.had you witnessed my behaviour there i can hardly suppose you wouldever have thought well of me again.
its effect upon her appearsin the immediate resolution it produced  as soon as she found iwas really gone from randalls she closed with the offer of thatofficious mrs. elton the whole system of whose treatment of herby the bye has ever filled me with indignation and hatred.i must not quarrel with a spirit of forbearance which has beenso richly extended towards myself but otherwise i should loudlyprotest against the share of it which that woman has known.jane indeedyou will observe that i have not yet indulged myselfin calling her by that name even to you.
think then what i musthave endured in hearing it bandied between the eltons with allthe vulgarity of needless repetition and all the insolence ofimaginary superiority.
have patience with me i shall soon have done.she closed with this offer resolving to break with me entirelyand wrote the next day to tell me that we never were to meet again.she felt the engagement to be a source of repentance and miseryto each  she dissolved it.this letter reached me on the verymorning of my poor aunts death.
i answered it within an hourbut from the confusion of my mind and the multiplicity of businessfalling on me at once my answer instead of being sent with allthe many other letters of that day was locked up in my writingdeskand i trusting that i had written enough though but a few linesto satisfy her remained without any uneasiness.i was ratherdisappointed that i did not hear from her again speedilybut i made excuses for her and was too busy andmay i addtoo cheerful in my views to be captious.we removed to windsorand two days afterwards i received a parcel from her my own lettersall returnedand a few lines at the same time by the poststating her extreme surprize at not having had the smallest replyto her last and adding that as silence on such a point couldnot be misconstrued and as it must be equally desirable to bothto have every subordinate arrangement concluded as soon as possibleshe now sent me by a safe conveyance all my letters and requestedthat if i could not directly command hers so as to send themto highbury within a week i would forward them after that periodto her at  in short the full direction to mr. smallridgesnear bristol stared me in the face.
i knew the name the placei knew all about it and instantly saw what she had been doing.it was perfectly accordant with that resolution of characterwhich i knew her to possess and the secrecy she had maintainedas to any such design in her former letter was equally descriptiveof its anxious delicacy.
for the world would not she have seemedto threaten me.imagine the shock imagine how till i had actuallydetected my own blunder i raved at the blunders of the post.what was to be doneone thing only.i must speak to my uncle.without his sanction i could not hope to be listened to again.i spoke circumstances were in my favour the late event had softenedaway his pride and he was earlier than i could have anticipatedwholly reconciled and complying and could say at last poor manwith a deep sigh that he wished i might find as much happinessin the marriage state as he had done.i felt that it would beof a different sort.are you disposed to pity me for what i musthave suffered in opening the cause to him for my suspense whileall was at stakeno do not pity me till i reached highburyand saw how ill i had made her.
do not pity me till i saw her wansick looks.i reached highbury at the time of day when from myknowledge of their late breakfast hour i was certain of a good chanceof finding her alone.i was not disappointed and at last i wasnot disappointed either in the object of my journey.
a great dealof very reasonable very just displeasure i had to persuade away.but it is done we are reconciled dearer much dearer than everand no moments uneasiness can ever occur between us again.
now mydear madam i will release you but i could not conclude before.a thousand and a thousand thanks for all the kindness you haveever shewn me and ten thousand for the attentions your heartwill dictate towards her.if you think me in a way to be happierthan i deserve i am quite of your opinion.miss w. calls methe child of good fortune.
i hope she is right.in one respectmy good fortune is undoubted that of being able to subscribemyself                    your obliged and affectionate son                                          f. c. weston churchill.chapter xvthis letter must make its way to emmas feelings.
she was obligedin spite of her previous determination to the contrary to doit all the justice that mrs. weston foretold.
as soon as shecame to her own name it was irresistible every line relatingto herself was interesting and almost every line agreeableand when this charm ceased the subject could still maintain itselfby the natural return of her former regard for the writer and thevery strong attraction which any picture of love must have for her atthat moment.
she never stopt till she had gone through the wholeand though it was impossible not to feel that he had been wrongyet he had been less wrong than she had supposedand he had sufferedand was very sorryand he was so grateful to mrs. westonand so much in love with miss fairfax and she was so happy herselfthat there was no being severe and could he have entered the roomshe must have shaken hands with him as heartily as ever.she thought so well of the letter that when mr. knightley came againshe desired him to read it.
she was sure of mrs. westons wishingit to be communicated especially to one who like mr. knightleyhad seen so much to blame in his conduct.i shall be very glad to look it over said he but it seems long.i will take it home with me at night.but that would not do.
mr. weston was to call in the eveningand she must return it by him.i would rather be talking to you he replied but as it seemsa matter of justice it shall be done.he beganstopping however almost directly to say had i been offeredthe sight of one of this gentlemans letters to his motherinlaw a fewmonths ago emma it would not have been taken with such indifference.he proceeded a little farther reading to himself and thenwith a smile observed humph a fine complimentary openingbut it is his way.
one mans style must not be the rule of anothers.we will not be severe.it will be natural for me he added shortly afterwards to speak myopinion aloud as i read.
by doing it i shall feel that i am near you.it will not be so great a loss of time  but if you dislike itnot at all.
i should wish it.mr.
knightley returned to his reading with greater alacrity.he trifles here said he as to the temptation.
he knowshe is wrong and has nothing rational to urge.bad.he oughtnot to have formed the engagement.his fathers dispositionhe is unjust however to his father.
mr. westons sanguinetemper was a blessing on all his upright and honourable exertionsbut mr. weston earned every present comfort before he endeavouredto gain it.very true he did not come till miss fairfax was here.and i have not forgotten said emma how sure you were that hemight have come sooner if he would.
you pass it over very handsomelybut you were perfectly right.i was not quite impartial in my judgment emmabut yet i thinkhad you not been in the casei should still have distrusted him.when he came to miss woodhouse he was obliged to read the wholeof it aloudall that related to her with a smile a looka shake of the head a word or two of assent or disapprobationor merely of love as the subject required concluding howeverseriously and after steady reflection thusvery badthough it might have been worse.playing a mostdangerous game.
too much indebted to the event for his acquittal.no judge of his own manners by you.always deceived in fact by hisown wishes and regardless of little besides his own convenience.fancying you to have fathomed his secret.
natural enoughhis own mind full of intrigue that he should suspect itin others.mystery finessehow they pervert the understandingmy emma does not every thing serve to prove more and more thebeauty of truth and sincerity in all our dealings with each otheremma agreed to it and with a blush of sensibility on harriets accountwhich she could not give any sincere explanation of.you had better go on said she.he did so but very soon stopt again to say the pianoforteah  that was the act of a very very young man one too youngto consider whether the inconvenience of it might not very muchexceed the pleasure.
a boyish scheme indeedi cannotcomprehend a mans wishing to give a woman any proof of affectionwhich he knows she would rather dispense with and he didknow that she would have prevented the instruments coming if she could.after this he made some progress without any pause.frank churchills confession of having behaved shamefullywas the first thing to call for more than a word in passing.i perfectly agree with you sirwas then his remark.you did behave very shamefully.
you never wrote a truer line.and having gone through what immediately followed of the basisof their disagreement and his persisting to act in directopposition to jane fairfaxs sense of right he made a fuller pauseto say this is very bad.he had induced her to place herselffor his sake in a situation of extreme difficulty and uneasinessand it should have been his first object to prevent her fromsuffering unnecessarily.she must have had much more to contend within carrying on the correspondence than he could.
he should haverespected even unreasonable scruples had there been such but herswere all reasonable.
we must look to her one fault and rememberthat she had done a wrong thing in consenting to the engagementto bear that she should have been in such a state of punishment.emma knew that he was now getting to the box hill partyand grew uncomfortable.
her own behaviour had been so very impropershe was deeply ashamed and a little afraid of his next look.it was all read however steadily attentively and withoutthe smallest remark and excepting one momentary glance at herinstantly withdrawn in the fear of giving painno remembranceof box hill seemed to exist.there is no saying much for the delicacy of our good friendsthe eltons was his next observation.his feelings are natural.what actually resolve to break with him entirelyshe feltthe engagement to be a source of repentance and misery to eachshe dissolved it.what a view this gives of her sense ofhis behaviourwell he must be a most extraordinarynay nay read on.you will find how very much he suffers.i hope he does replied mr. knightley coolly and resuming the letter.smallridgewhat does this mean  what is all thisshe had engaged to go as governess to mrs. smallridges childrena dear friend of mrs. eltonsa neighbour of maple grove andby the bye i wonder how mrs. elton bears the disappointmentsay nothing my dear emma while you oblige me to readnot evenof mrs. elton.
only one page more.
i shall soon have done.what a letter the man writesi wish you would read it with a kinder spirit towards him.well there is feeling here.he does seem to have suffered in findingher ill.certainly i can have no doubt of his being fond of her.dearer much dearer than ever.
i hope he may long continue to feelall the value of such a reconciliation.he is a very liberal thankerwith his thousands and tens of thousands.happier than i deserve.come he knows himself there.
miss woodhouse calls me the childof good fortune.those were miss woodhouses words were theyand a fine endingand there is the letter.
the child of good fortunethat was your name for him was ityou do not appear so well satisfied with his letter as i ambut still you must at least i hope you must think the betterof him for it.
i hope it does him some service with you.yes certainly it does.
he has had great faults faults ofinconsideration and thoughtlessness and i am very much of hisopinion in thinking him likely to be happier than he deservesbut still as he is beyond a doubt really attached to miss fairfaxand will soon it may be hoped have the advantage of being constantlywith her i am very ready to believe his character will improveand acquire from hers the steadiness and delicacy of principlethat it wants.
and now let me talk to you of something else.i have another persons interest at present so much at heartthat i cannot think any longer about frank churchill.
ever since ileft you this morning emma my mind has been hard at work onone subject.the subject followed it was in plain unaffected gentlemanlike englishsuch as mr. knightley used even to the woman he was in love withhow to be able to ask her to marry him without attacking thehappiness of her father.
emmas answer was ready at the first word.while her dear father lived any change of condition must be impossiblefor her.
she could never quit him.
part only of this answerhowever was admitted.
the impossibility of her quitting her fathermr.
knightley felt as strongly as herself but the inadmissibilityof any other change he could not agree to.
he had been thinkingit over most deeply most intently he had at first hoped to inducemr.
woodhouse to remove with her to donwell he had wanted to believeit feasible but his knowledge of mr. woodhouse would not sufferhim to deceive himself long and now he confessed his persuasionthat such a transplantation would be a risk of her fathers comfortperhaps even of his life which must not be hazarded.
mr. woodhousetaken from hartfieldno he felt that it ought not to be attempted.but the plan which had arisen on the sacrifice of this he trustedhis dearest emma would not find in any respect objectionableit was that he should be received at hartfield that so long asher fathers happiness in other words his liferequired hartfieldto continue her home it should be his likewise.of their all removing to donwell emma had already had her ownpassing thoughts.
like him she had tried the scheme and rejected itbut such an alternative as this had not occurred to her.she was sensible of all the affection it evinced.
she felt thatin quitting donwell he must be sacrificing a great deal of independenceof hours and habits that in living constantly with her fatherand in no house of his own there would be much very muchto be borne with.
she promised to think of it and advised himto think of it more but he was fully convinced that no reflectioncould alter his wishes or his opinion on the subject.
he hadgiven it he could assure her very long and calm considerationhe had been walking away from william larkins the whole morningto have his thoughts to himself.ah there is one difficulty unprovided for cried emma.
i amsure william larkins will not like it.
you must get his consentbefore you ask mine.she promised however to think of it and pretty nearly promised moreoverto think of it with the intention of finding it a very good scheme.it is remarkable that emma in the many very many points of viewin which she was now beginning to consider donwell abbey was neverstruck with any sense of injury to her nephew henry whose rightsas heirexpectant had formerly been so tenaciously regarded.think she must of the possible difference to the poor little boyand yet she only gave herself a saucy conscious smile about itand found amusement in detecting the real cause of that violentdislike of mr. knightleys marrying jane fairfax or any body elsewhich at the time she had wholly imputed to the amiable solicitude ofthe sister and the aunt.this proposal of his this plan of marrying and continuing at hartfieldthe more she contemplated it the more pleasing it became.his evils seemed to lessen her own advantages to increasetheir mutual good to outweigh every drawback.
such a companionfor herself in the periods of anxiety and cheerlessness before hersuch a partner in all those duties and cares to which time must begiving increase of melancholyshe would have been too happy but for poor harriet but everyblessing of her own seemed to involve and advance the sufferingsof her friend who must now be even excluded from hartfield.the delightful family party which emma was securing for herselfpoor harriet must in mere charitable caution be kept at adistance from.
she would be a loser in every way.
emma could notdeplore her future absence as any deduction from her own enjoyment.in such a party harriet would be rather a dead weight than otherwisebut for the poor girl herself it seemed a peculiarly cruel necessitythat was to be placing her in such a state of unmerited punishment.in time of course mr. knightley would be forgotten that issupplanted but this could not be expected to happen very early.mr.
knightley himself would be doing nothing to assist the curenot like mr. elton.
mr. knightley always so kind so feelingso truly considerate for every body would never deserve to beless worshipped than now and it really was too much to hope evenof harriet that she could be in love with more than three menin one year.chapter xviit was a very great relief to emma to find harriet as desirousas herself to avoid a meeting.
their intercourse was painfulenough by letter.
how much worse had they been obliged to meetharriet expressed herself very much as might be supposedwithout reproaches or apparent sense of illusage and yet emma fanciedthere was a something of resentment a something bordering on it inher style which increased the desirableness of their being separate.it might be only her own consciousness but it seemed as if anangel only could have been quite without resentment under such a stroke.she had no difficulty in procuring isabellas invitationand she was fortunate in having a sufficient reason for asking itwithout resorting to invention.there was a tooth amiss.harriet really wished and had wished some time to consult a dentist.mrs.
john knightley was delighted to be of use any thing of illhealth was a recommendation to herand though not so fond of adentist as of a mr. wingfield she was quite eager to have harrietunder her care.when it was thus settled on her sisters sideemma proposed it to her friend and found her very persuadable.harriet was to go she was invited for at least a fortnight she wasto be conveyed in mr. woodhouses carriage.it was all arrangedit was all completed and harriet was safe in brunswick square.now emma could indeed enjoy mr. knightleys visits now shecould talk and she could listen with true happiness unchecked bythat sense of injustice of guilt of something most painfulwhich had haunted her when remembering how disappointed a heart wasnear her how much might at that moment and at a little distancebe enduring by the feelings which she had led astray herself.the difference of harriet at mrs. goddards or in london made perhapsan unreasonable difference in emmas sensations but she could notthink of her in london without objects of curiosity and employmentwhich must be averting the past and carrying her out of herself.she would not allow any other anxiety to succeed directly to the placein her mind which harriet had occupied.
there was a communicationbefore her one which she only could be competent to makethe confession of her engagement to her father but she wouldhave nothing to do with it at present.she had resolved to deferthe disclosure till mrs. weston were safe and well.
no additionalagitation should be thrown at this period among those she lovedand the evil should not act on herself by anticipation before theappointed time.a fortnight at least of leisure and peace of mindto crown every warmer but more agitating delight should be hers.she soon resolved equally as a duty and a pleasure to employ halfan hour of this holiday of spirits in calling on miss fairfax.she ought to goand she was longing to see her the resemblance oftheir present situations increasing every other motive of goodwill.it would be a secret satisfaction but the consciousness of asimilarity of prospect would certainly add to the interest withwhich she should attend to any thing jane might communicate.she wentshe had driven once unsuccessfully to the door but hadnot been into the house since the morning after box hill when poorjane had been in such distress as had filled her with compassionthough all the worst of her sufferings had been unsuspected.the fear of being still unwelcome determined her though assuredof their being at home to wait in the passage and send up her name.she heard patty announcing it but no such bustle succeeded as poormiss bates had before made so happily intelligible.no she heardnothing but the instant reply of beg her to walk upand a momentafterwards she was met on the stairs by jane herself coming eagerlyforward as if no other reception of her were felt sufficient.emma had never seen her look so well so lovely so engaging.there was consciousness animation and warmth there was everything which her countenance or manner could ever have wanted.she came forward with an offered hand and said in a low but veryfeeling tonethis is most kind indeedmiss woodhouse it is impossiblefor me to expressi hope you will believeexcuse me for beingso entirely without words.emma was gratified and would soon have shewn no want of wordsif the sound of mrs. eltons voice from the sittingroom had notchecked her and made it expedient to compress all her friendlyand all her congratulatory sensations into a very very earnestshake of the hand.mrs.
bates and mrs. elton were together.
miss bates was outwhich accounted for the previous tranquillity.
emma could havewished mrs. elton elsewhere but she was in a humour to have patiencewith every body and as mrs. elton met her with unusual graciousnessshe hoped the rencontre would do them no harm.she soon believed herself to penetrate mrs. eltons thoughtsand understand why she was like herself in happy spiritsit was being in miss fairfaxs confidence and fancying herselfacquainted with what was still a secret to other people.emma saw symptoms of it immediately in the expression of her faceand while paying her own compliments to mrs. bates and appearingto attend to the good old ladys replies she saw her with a sortof anxious parade of mystery fold up a letter which she had apparentlybeen reading aloud to miss fairfax and return it into the purpleand gold reticule by her side saying with significant nodswe can finish this some other time you know.
you and i shallnot want opportunities.
and in fact you have heard all theessential already.
i only wanted to prove to you that mrs. s. admitsour apology and is not offended.
you see how delightfullyshe writes.
oh she is a sweet creature  you would have doatedon her had you gone.but not a word more.
let us be discreetquite on our good behaviour.hushyou remember those linesi forget the poem at this moment        for when a ladys in the case        you know all other things give place.now i say my dear in our case for lady readmum a wordto the wise.i am in a fine flow of spirits ant i  but i wantto set your heart at ease as to mrs. s.my representation you seehas quite appeased her.and again on emmas merely turning her head to lookat mrs. batess knitting she added in a half whisperi mentioned no names you will observe.oh no cautious asa minister of state.
i managed it extremely well.emma could not doubt.
it was a palpable display repeated on everypossible occasion.
when they had all talked a little while in harmonyof the weather and mrs. weston she found herself abruptly addressed withdo not you think miss woodhouse our saucy little friend here ischarmingly recovereddo not you think her cure does perry thehighest credithere was a sideglance of great meaning at jane.upon my word perry has restored her in a wonderful short timeoh if you had seen her as i did when she was at the worstand when mrs. bates was saying something to emma whispered fartherwe do not say a word of any assistance that perry might havenot a word of a certain young physician from windsor.oh noperry shall have all the credit.i have scarce had the pleasure of seeing you miss woodhouseshe shortly afterwards began since the party to box hill.very pleasant party.
but yet i think there was something wanting.things did not seemthat is there seemed a little cloud uponthe spirits of some.so it appeared to me at least but i mightbe mistaken.
however i think it answered so far as to tempt oneto go again.
what say you both to our collecting the same partyand exploring to box hill again while the fine weather lastsit must be the same party you know quite the same partynot one exception.soon after this miss bates came in and emma could not help being divertedby the perplexity of her first answer to herself resulting she supposedfrom doubt of what might be said and impatience to say every thing.thank you dear miss woodhouse you are all kindness.it is impossibleto sayyes indeed i quite understanddearest janes prospectsthat is i do not mean.but she is charmingly recovered.how is mr. woodhousei am so glad.quite out of my power.such a happy little circle as you find us here.yes indeed.charming young manthat isso very friendly i mean good mr. perrysuch attention to janeand from her great her more than commonlythankful delight towards mrs. elton for being there emma guessedthat there had been a little show of resentment towards janefrom the vicarage quarter which was now graciously overcome.after a few whispers indeed which placed it beyond a guessmrs.
elton speaking louder saidyes here i am my good friend and here i have been so longthat anywhere else i should think it necessary to apologisebut the truth is that i am waiting for my lord and master.he promised to join me here and pay his respects to you.what are we to have the pleasure of a call from mr. eltonthat will be a favour indeed for i know gentlemen do not likemorning visits and mr. eltons time is so engaged.upon my word it is miss bates.he really is engaged from morningto night.there is no end of peoples coming to him on some pretenceor other.the magistrates and overseers and churchwardensare always wanting his opinion.
they seem not able to do any thingwithout him.upon my word mr. e. i often say rather you than i.i do not know what would become of my crayons and my instrumentif i had half so many applicants.bad enough as it is for iabsolutely neglect them both to an unpardonable degree.i believei have not played a bar this fortnight.however he is comingi assure you  yes indeed on purpose to wait on you all.
and puttingup her hand to screen her words from emmaa congratulatory visityou know.oh yes quite indispensable.miss bates looked about her so happilyhe promised to come to me as soon as he could disengage himselffrom knightley but he and knightley are shut up togetherin deep consultation.mr.
e. is knightleys right hand.emma would not have smiled for the world and only said is mr. eltongone on foot to donwellhe will have a hot walk.oh no it is a meeting at the crown a regular meeting.weston and cole will be there too but one is apt to speak onlyof those who lead.i fancy mr. e. and knightley have every thingtheir own way.have not you mistaken the day said emma.
i am almost certainthat the meeting at the crown is not till tomorrow.mr.
knightleywas at hartfield yesterday and spoke of it as for saturday.oh no the meeting is certainly today was the abrupt answerwhich denoted the impossibility of any blunder on mrs. eltons side.i do believe she continued this is the most troublesome parishthat ever was.
we never heard of such things at maple grove.your parish there was small said jane.upon my word my dear i do not know for i never heard the subjecttalked of.but it is proved by the smallness of the school which i have heardyou speak of as under the patronage of your sister and mrs. braggethe only school and not more than fiveandtwenty children.ah you clever creature thats very true.
what a thinking brainyou have  i say jane what a perfect character you and i should makeif we could be shaken together.
my liveliness and your soliditywould produce perfection.not that i presume to insinuate howeverthat some people may not think you perfection already.but hushnot a word if you please.it seemed an unnecessary caution jane was wanting to give her wordsnot to mrs. elton but to miss woodhouse as the latter plainly saw.the wish of distinguishing her as far as civility permittedwas very evident though it could not often proceed beyond a look.mr.
elton made his appearance.
his lady greeted him with someof her sparkling vivacity.very pretty sir upon my word to send me on here to be anencumbrance to my friends so long before you vouchsafe to comebut you knew what a dutiful creature you had to deal with.you knew i should not stir till my lord and master appeared.here have i been sitting this hour giving these young ladiesa sample of true conjugal obediencefor who can say you knowhow soon it may be wantedmr.
elton was so hot and tired that all this wit seemed thrown away.his civilities to the other ladies must be paid but his subsequentobject was to lament over himself for the heat he was sufferingand the walk he had had for nothing.when i got to donwell said he knightley could not be found.very odd very unaccountable after the note i sent him this morningand the message he returned that he should certainly be at hometill one.donwell cried his wife.my dear mr. e. you have not beento donwellyou mean the crown you come from the meeting at the crown.no no thats tomorrow and i particularly wanted to see knightleytoday on that very account.such a dreadful broiling morningi went over the fields toospeaking in a tone of great illusagewhich made it so much the worse.
and then not to find him at homei assure you i am not at all pleased.
and no apology left no messagefor me.
the housekeeper declared she knew nothing of my being expected.very extraordinaryand nobody knew at all which way he was gone.perhaps to hartfield perhaps to the abbey mill perhaps into his woods.miss woodhouse this is not like our friend knightleycan youexplain itemma amused herself by protesting that it was very extraordinaryindeed and that she had not a syllable to say for him.i cannot imagine said mrs. elton feeling the indignity as a wifeought to do i cannot imagine how he could do such a thing by youof all people in the world  the very last person whom one should expectto be forgottenmy dear mr. e. he must have left a message for youi am sure he must.not even knightley could be so very eccentricand his servants forgot it.
depend upon it that was the caseand very likely to happen with the donwell servants who are alli have often observed extremely awkward and remiss.i am sure iwould not have such a creature as his harry stand at our sideboardfor any consideration.
and as for mrs. hodges wright holdsher very cheap indeed.she promised wright a receipt and neversent it.i met william larkins continued mr. elton as i got nearthe house and he told me i should not find his master at homebut i did not believe him.william seemed rather out of humour.he did not know what was come to his master lately he said but hecould hardly ever get the speech of him.
i have nothing to do withwilliams wants but it really is of very great importance that ishould see knightley today and it becomes a matter thereforeof very serious inconvenience that i should have had this hot walkto no purpose.emma felt that she could not do better than go home directly.in all probability she was at this very time waited for thereand mr. knightley might be preserved from sinking deeper in aggressiontowards mr. elton if not towards william larkins.she was pleased on taking leave to find miss fairfax determinedto attend her out of the room to go with her even downstairsit gave her an opportunity which she immediately made use ofto sayit is as well perhaps that i have not had the possibility.had you not been surrounded by other friends i might have beentempted to introduce a subject to ask questions to speak moreopenly than might have been strictly correct.i feel that i shouldcertainly have been impertinent.oh cried jane with a blush and an hesitation which emma thoughtinfinitely more becoming to her than all the elegance of all herusual composurethere would have been no danger.
the dangerwould have been of my wearying you.
you could not have gratifiedme more than by expressing an interest.
indeed miss woodhousespeaking more collectedly with the consciousness which ihave of misconduct very great misconduct it is particularlyconsoling to me to know that those of my friends whose goodopinion is most worth preserving are not disgusted to such adegree as toi have not time for half that i could wish to say.i long to make apologies excuses to urge something for myself.i feel it so very due.
but unfortunatelyin short if yourcompassion does not stand my friendoh you are too scrupulous indeed you are cried emma warmlyand taking her hand.
you owe me no apologies and every body towhom you might be supposed to owe them is so perfectly satisfiedso delighted evenyou are very kind but i know what my manners were to you.so cold and artificiali had always a part to act.it was a lifeof deceiti know that i must have disgusted you.pray say no more.
i feel that all the apologies should be on my side.let us forgive each other at once.
we must do whatever is to bedone quickest and i think our feelings will lose no time there.i hope you have pleasant accounts from windsorvery.and the next news i suppose will be that we are to lose youjust as i begin to know you.oh as to all that of course nothing can be thought of yet.i am here till claimed by colonel and mrs. campbell.nothing can be actually settled yet perhaps replied emmasmilingbut excuse me it must be thought of.the smile was returned as jane answeredyou are very right it has been thought of.
and i will ownto you i am sure it will be safe that so far as our livingwith mr. churchill at enscombe it is settled.
there must bethree months at least of deep mourning but when they are overi imagine there will be nothing more to wait for.thank you thank you.this is just what i wanted to be assured of.oh if you knew how much i love every thing that is decided and opengoodbye goodbye.chapter xviimrs.
westons friends were all made happy by her safetyand if the satisfaction of her welldoing could be increasedto emma it was by knowing her to be the mother of a little girl.she had been decided in wishing for a miss weston.
she wouldnot acknowledge that it was with any view of making a matchfor her hereafter with either of isabellas sons but she wasconvinced that a daughter would suit both father and mother best.it would be a great comfort to mr. weston as he grew olderand even mr. weston might be growing older ten years henceto havehis fireside enlivened by the sports and the nonsense the freaksand the fancies of a child never banished from home and mrs. westonno one could doubt that a daughter would be most to her and itwould be quite a pity that any one who so well knew how to teachshould not have their powers in exercise again.she has had the advantage you know of practising on meshe continuedlike la baronne dalmane on la comtesse dostalisin madame de genlis adelaide and theodore and we shall now seeher own little adelaide educated on a more perfect plan.that is replied mr. knightley she will indulge her even morethan she did you and believe that she does not indulge her at all.it will be the only difference.poor child cried emma at that rate what will become of hernothing very bad.the fate of thousands.
she will be disagreeablein infancy and correct herself as she grows older.
i am losingall my bitterness against spoilt children my dearest emma.i who am owing all my happiness to you would not it be horribleingratitude in me to be severe on thememma laughed and replied  but i had the assistance of allyour endeavours to counteract the indulgence of other people.i doubt whether my own sense would have corrected me without it.do youi have no doubt.
nature gave you understandingmiss taylor gave you principles.
you must have done well.my interference was quite as likely to do harm as good.
it wasvery natural for you to say what right has he to lecture meand i am afraid very natural for you to feel that it was donein a disagreeable manner.
i do not believe i did you any good.the good was all to myself by making you an object of the tenderestaffection to me.
i could not think about you so much without doatingon you faults and all and by dint of fancying so many errorshave been in love with you ever since you were thirteen at least.i am sure you were of use to me cried emma.
i was very ofteninfluenced rightly by youoftener than i would own at the time.i am very sure you did me good.
and if poor little anna weston isto be spoiled it will be the greatest humanity in you to do as muchfor her as you have done for me except falling in love with herwhen she is thirteen.how often when you were a girl have you said to me with oneof your saucy looksmr.
knightley i am going to do soandsopapa says i may or i have miss taylors leavesomething whichyou knew i did not approve.
in such cases my interference was givingyou two bad feelings instead of one.what an amiable creature i wasno wonder you should holdmy speeches in such affectionate remembrance.mr.
knightley.you always called me mr. knightley andfrom habit it has not so very formal a sound.and yet it is formal.i want you to call me something else but i do not know what.i remember once calling you george in one of my amiable fitsabout ten years ago.
i did it because i thought it would offend youbut as you made no objection i never did it again.and cannot you call me george nowimpossiblei never can call you any thing but mr. knightley.i will not promise even to equal the elegant terseness of mrs. eltonby calling you mr. k.but i will promise she added presentlylaughing and blushingi will promise to call you once by yourchristian name.
i do not say when but perhaps you may guesswherein the building in which n. takes m. for better for worse.emma grieved that she could not be more openly just to oneimportant service which his better sense would have rendered herto the advice which would have saved her from the worst of allher womanly folliesher wilful intimacy with harriet smithbut it was too tender a subject.she could not enter on it.harriet was very seldom mentioned between them.
this on his sidemight merely proceed from her not being thought of but emmawas rather inclined to attribute it to delicacy and a suspicionfrom some appearances that their friendship were declining.she was aware herself that parting under any other circumstancesthey certainly should have corresponded more and that herintelligence would not have rested as it now almost wholly didon isabellas letters.
he might observe that it was so.
the painof being obliged to practise concealment towards him was very littleinferior to the pain of having made harriet unhappy.isabella sent quite as good an account of her visitor as couldbe expected on her first arrival she had thought her out of spiritswhich appeared perfectly natural as there was a dentist tobe consulted but since that business had been over she did notappear to find harriet different from what she had known her before.isabella to be sure was no very quick observer yet if harriethad not been equal to playing with the children it would not haveescaped her.
emmas comforts and hopes were most agreeably carried onby harriets being to stay longer her fortnight was likely to bea month at least.
mr. and mrs. john knightley were to come downin august and she was invited to remain till they could bring her back.john does not even mention your friend said mr. knightley.here is his answer if you like to see it.it was the answer to the communication of his intended marriage.emma accepted it with a very eager hand with an impatience all aliveto know what he would say about it and not at all checked by hearingthat her friend was unmentioned.john enters like a brother into my happiness continued mr. knightleybut he is no complimenter and though i well know him to havelikewise a most brotherly affection for you he is so far frommaking flourishes that any other young woman might think him rathercool in her praise.
but i am not afraid of your seeing what he writes.he writes like a sensible man replied emma when she had readthe letter.
i honour his sincerity.
it is very plain that heconsiders the good fortune of the engagement as all on my sidebut that he is not without hope of my growing in time as worthyof your affection as you think me already.
had he said any thingto bear a different construction i should not have believed him.my emma he means no such thing.
he only meanshe and i should differ very little in our estimation of the twointerrupted she with a sort of serious smilemuch less perhapsthan he is aware of if we could enter without ceremony or reserveon the subject.emma my dear emmaoh she cried with more thorough gaiety if you fancy yourbrother does not do me justice only wait till my dear father is inthe secret and hear his opinion.
depend upon it he will be muchfarther from doing you justice.
he will think all the happinessall the advantage on your side of the question all the meriton mine.
i wish i may not sink into poor emma with him at once.his tender compassion towards oppressed worth can go no farther.ah he cried i wish your father might be half as easily convincedas john will be of our having every right that equal worth can giveto be happy together.
i am amused by one part of johns letterdid you notice itwhere he says that my information did not takehim wholly by surprize that he was rather in expectation of hearingsomething of the kind.if i understand your brother he only means so far as your havingsome thoughts of marrying.
he had no idea of me.
he seems perfectlyunprepared for that.yes yesbut i am amused that he should have seen so far intomy feelings.
what has he been judging byi am not consciousof any difference in my spirits or conversation that could preparehim at this time for my marrying any more than at another.but it was so i suppose.
i dare say there was a difference when iwas staying with them the other day.
i believe i did not playwith the children quite so much as usual.
i remember one eveningthe poor boys saying uncle seems always tired now.the time was coming when the news must spread farther and other personsreception of it tried.
as soon as mrs. weston was sufficientlyrecovered to admit mr. woodhouses visits emma having it in viewthat her gentle reasonings should be employed in the causeresolved first to announce it at home and then at randalls.but how to break it to her father at lastshe had bound herselfto do it in such an hour of mr. knightleys absence or when itcame to the point her heart would have failed her and she musthave put it off but mr. knightley was to come at such a timeand follow up the beginning she was to make.she was forcedto speak and to speak cheerfully too.
she must not make it a moredecided subject of misery to him by a melancholy tone herself.she must not appear to think it a misfortune.with all the spiritsshe could command she prepared him first for something strangeand then in a few words said that if his consent and approbationcould be obtainedwhich she trusted would be attended withno difficulty since it was a plan to promote the happiness of allshe and mr. knightley meant to marry by which means hartfieldwould receive the constant addition of that persons companywhom she knew he loved next to his daughters and mrs. westonbest in the world.poor manit was at first a considerable shock to him and he triedearnestly to dissuade her from it.
she was reminded more than onceof having always said she would never marry and assured that itwould be a great deal better for her to remain single and told ofpoor isabella and poor miss taylor.but it would not do.
emma hungabout him affectionately and smiled and said it must be so and thathe must not class her with isabella and mrs. weston whose marriagestaking them from hartfield had indeed made a melancholy changebut she was not going from hartfield she should be always thereshe was introducing no change in their numbers or their comforts butfor the better and she was very sure that he would be a great dealthe happier for having mr. knightley always at hand when he were oncegot used to the idea.did he not love mr. knightley very muchhe would not deny that he did she was sure.whom did he ever wantto consult on business but mr. knightleywho was so useful to himwho so ready to write his letters who so glad to assist himwho so cheerful so attentive so attached to himwould not helike to have him always on the spotyes.
that was all very true.mr.
knightley could not be there too often he should be glad to seehim every daybut they did see him every day as it was.why couldnot they go on as they had donemr.
woodhouse could not be soon reconciled but the worst was overcomethe idea was given time and continual repetition must do the rest.to emmas entreaties and assurances succeeded mr. knightleyswhose fond praise of her gave the subject even a kind of welcomeand he was soon used to be talked to by each on every fair occasion.they had all the assistance which isabella could give by lettersof the strongest approbation and mrs. weston was readyon the first meeting to consider the subject in the mostserviceable lightfirst as a settled and secondly as a good onewell aware of the nearly equal importance of the two recommendationsto mr. woodhouses mind.it was agreed upon as what was to beand every body by whom he was used to be guided assuring him thatit would be for his happiness and having some feelings himselfwhich almost admitted it he began to think that some time or otherin another year or two perhapsit might not be so very badif the marriage did take place.mrs.
weston was acting no part feigning no feelings in all that shesaid to him in favour of the event.she had been extremely surprizednever more so than when emma first opened the affair to herbut she saw in it only increase of happiness to all and hadno scruple in urging him to the utmost.she had such a regardfor mr. knightley as to think he deserved even her dearest emmaand it was in every respect so proper suitable and unexceptionablea connexion and in one respect one point of the highest importanceso peculiarly eligible so singularly fortunate that now it seemedas if emma could not safely have attached herself to any other creatureand that she had herself been the stupidest of beings in not havingthought of it and wished it long ago.how very few of those menin a rank of life to address emma would have renounced their ownhome for hartfield  and who but mr. knightley could know and bearwith mr. woodhouse so as to make such an arrangement desirablethe difficulty of disposing of poor mr. woodhouse had been alwaysfelt in her husbands plans and her own for a marriage between frankand emma.
how to settle the claims of enscombe and hartfield hadbeen a continual impedimentless acknowledged by mr. weston thanby herselfbut even he had never been able to finish the subjectbetter than by sayingthose matters will take care of themselvesthe young people will find a way.
but here there was nothing to beshifted off in a wild speculation on the future.
it was all rightall open all equal.
no sacrifice on any side worth the name.it was a union of the highest promise of felicity in itselfand without one real rational difficulty to oppose or delay it.mrs.
weston with her baby on her knee indulging in such reflectionsas these was one of the happiest women in the world.
if any thingcould increase her delight it was perceiving that the baby wouldsoon have outgrown its first set of caps.the news was universally a surprize wherever it spreadand mr. weston had his five minutes share of it but five minuteswere enough to familiarise the idea to his quickness of mind.he saw the advantages of the match and rejoiced in them with allthe constancy of his wife but the wonder of it was very soon nothingand by the end of an hour he was not far from believing that hehad always foreseen it.it is to be a secret i conclude said he.
these matters arealways a secret till it is found out that every body knows them.only let me be told when i may speak out.i wonder whether jane hasany suspicion.he went to highbury the next morning and satisfied himself onthat point.
he told her the news.
was not she like a daughterhis eldest daughterhe must tell her and miss bates being presentit passed of course to mrs. cole mrs. perry and mrs. eltonimmediately afterwards.
it was no more than the principals wereprepared for they had calculated from the time of its being knownat randalls how soon it would be over highbury and were thinkingof themselves as the evening wonder in many a family circlewith great sagacity.in general it was a very well approved match.
some might think himand others might think her the most in luck.
one set mightrecommend their all removing to donwell and leaving hartfieldfor the john knightleys and another might predict disagreementsamong their servants but yet upon the whole there was no seriousobjection raised except in one habitation the vicarage.therethe surprize was not softened by any satisfaction.
mr. eltoncared little about it compared with his wife he only hoped theyoung ladys pride would now be contented and supposed she hadalways meant to catch knightley if she could and on the pointof living at hartfield could daringly exclaim rather he than ibut mrs. elton was very much discomposed indeed.poor knightleypoor fellowsad business for him.she was extremely concernedfor though very eccentric he had a thousand good qualities.how could he be so taken indid not think him at all in lovenot in the least.poor knightleythere would be an end of allpleasant intercourse with him.how happy he had been to come and dinewith them whenever they asked him  but that would be all over now.poor fellowno more exploring parties to donwell made for her.oh no there would be a mrs. knightley to throw cold water onevery thing.extremely disagreeable  but she was not at all sorrythat she had abused the housekeeper the other day.shocking planliving together.
it would never do.
she knew a family near maplegrove who had tried it and been obliged to separate before the endof the first quarter.chapter xviiitime passed on.
a few more tomorrows and the party from londonwould be arriving.
it was an alarming change and emma was thinkingof it one morning as what must bring a great deal to agitate andgrieve her when mr. knightley came in and distressing thoughtswere put by.
after the first chat of pleasure he was silentand then in a graver tone began withi have something to tell you emma some news.good or bad said she quickly looking up in his face.i do not know which it ought to be called.oh good i am sure.i see it in your countenance.
you are tryingnot to smile.i am afraid said he composing his features i am very much afraidmy dear emma that you will not smile when you hear it.indeed but why soi can hardly imagine that any thing whichpleases or amuses you should not please and amuse me too.there is one subject he replied i hope but one on whichwe do not think alike.
he paused a moment again smilingwith his eyes fixed on her face.
does nothing occur to youdo not you recollectharriet smith.her cheeks flushed at the name and she felt afraid of somethingthough she knew not what.have you heard from her yourself this morning cried he.you have i believe and know the whole.no i have not i know nothing pray tell me.you are prepared for the worst i seeand very bad it is.harriet smith marries robert martin.emma gave a start which did not seem like being preparedand her eyes in eager gaze said no this is impossiblebut her lips were closed.it is so indeed continued mr. knightley i have it from robertmartin himself.
he left me not half an hour ago.she was still looking at him with the most speaking amazement.you like it my emma as little as i feared.i wish our opinions werethe same.
but in time they will.
time you may be sure will makeone or the other of us think differently and in the meanwhilewe need not talk much on the subject.you mistake me you quite mistake me she replied exerting herself.it is not that such a circumstance would now make me unhappybut i cannot believe it.
it seems an impossibilityyou cannot meanto say that harriet smith has accepted robert martin.
you cannotmean that he has even proposed to her againyet.
you only meanthat he intends it.i mean that he has done it answered mr. knightley with smilingbut determined decision and been accepted.good god she cried.wellthen having recourse to her workbasketin excuse for leaning down her face and concealing all theexquisite feelings of delight and entertainment which she knew shemust be expressing she added well now tell me every thingmake this intelligible to me.
how where whenlet me know it all.i never was more surprizedbut it does not make me unhappyi assure you.howhow has it been possibleit is a very simple story.
he went to town on business three days agoand i got him to take charge of some papers which i was wantingto send to john.he delivered these papers to john at his chambersand was asked by him to join their party the same evening to astleys.they were going to take the two eldest boys to astleys.
the partywas to be our brother and sister henry johnand miss smith.my friend robert could not resist.
they called for him in their waywere all extremely amused and my brother asked him to dine withthem the next daywhich he didand in the course of that visitas i understand he found an opportunity of speaking to harrietand certainly did not speak in vain.she made him by her acceptanceas happy even as he is deserving.
he came down by yesterdays coachand was with me this morning immediately after breakfast to reporthis proceedings first on my affairs and then on his own.this is all that i can relate of the how where and when.your friend harriet will make a much longer history when you see her.she will give you all the minute particulars which only womanslanguage can make interesting.in our communications we deal onlyin the great.however i must say that robert martins heart seemedfor him and to me very overflowing and that he did mentionwithout its being much to the purpose that on quitting theirbox at astleys my brother took charge of mrs. john knightleyand little john and he followed with miss smith and henryand that at one time they were in such a crowd as to make miss smithrather uneasy.he stopped.emma dared not attempt any immediate reply.
to speakshe was sure would be to betray a most unreasonable degreeof happiness.
she must wait a moment or he would think her mad.her silence disturbed him and after observing her a little whilehe addedemma my love you said that this circumstance would not now makeyou unhappy but i am afraid it gives you more pain than you expected.his situation is an evilbut you must consider it as what satisfiesyour friend and i will answer for your thinking better and betterof him as you know him more.
his good sense and good principles woulddelight you.as far as the man is concerned you could not wish yourfriend in better hands.
his rank in society i would alter if i couldwhich is saying a great deal i assure you emma.you laugh at meabout william larkins but i could quite as ill spare robert martin.he wanted her to look up and smile and having now brought herselfnot to smile too broadlyshe didcheerfully answeringyou need not be at any pains to reconcile me to the match.
i thinkharriet is doing extremely well.
her connexions may be worse than his.in respectability of character there can be no doubt that they are.i have been silent from surprize merely excessive surprize.you cannot imagine how suddenly it has come on me how peculiarlyunprepared i wasfor i had reason to believe her very lately moredetermined against him much more than she was before.you ought to know your friend best replied mr. knightleybut i should say she was a goodtempered softhearted girlnot likely to be very very determined against any young man who toldher he loved her.emma could not help laughing as she answered upon my wordi believe you know her quite as well as i do.but mr. knightleyare you perfectly sure that she has absolutely and downrightaccepted him.
i could suppose she might in timebut can she alreadydid not you misunderstand himyou were both talking of other thingsof business shows of cattle or new drillsand might not youin the confusion of so many subjects mistake himit was notharriets hand that he was certain ofit was the dimensions of somefamous ox.the contrast between the countenance and air of mr. knightley androbert martin was at this moment so strong to emmas feelingsand so strong was the recollection of all that had so recentlypassed on harriets side so fresh the sound of those wordsspoken with such emphasis no i hope i know better than to thinkof robert martin that she was really expecting the intelligenceto prove in some measure premature.
it could not be otherwise.do you dare say this cried mr. knightley.
do you dare to supposeme so great a blockhead as not to know what a man is talking ofwhat do you deserveoh  i always deserve the best treatment because i never putup with any other and therefore you must give me a plaindirect answer.
are you quite sure that you understand the termson which mr. martin and harriet now arei am quite sure he replied speaking very distinctly that hetold me she had accepted him and that there was no obscuritynothing doubtful in the words he used and i think i can give youa proof that it must be so.
he asked my opinion as to what hewas now to do.
he knew of no one but mrs. goddard to whom hecould apply for information of her relations or friends.
could imention any thing more fit to be done than to go to mrs. goddardi assured him that i could not.
then he said he would endeavourto see her in the course of this day.i am perfectly satisfied replied emma with the brightest smilesand most sincerely wish them happy.you are materially changed since we talked on this subject before.i hope sofor at that time i was a fool.and i am changed also for i am now very willing to grant you allharriets good qualities.
i have taken some pains for your sakeand for robert martins sake whom i have always had reason to believeas much in love with her as ever to get acquainted with her.i have often talked to her a good deal.
you must have seen thati did.
sometimes indeed i have thought you were half suspecting meof pleading poor martins cause which was never the case but from allmy observations i am convinced of her being an artless amiable girlwith very good notions very seriously good principles and placingher happiness in the affections and utility of domestic life.much of this i have no doubt she may thank you for.me cried emma shaking her head.ah poor harrietshe checked herself however and submitted quietly to a littlemore praise than she deserved.their conversation was soon afterwards closed by the entrance ofher father.
she was not sorry.
she wanted to be alone.
her mindwas in a state of flutter and wonder which made it impossible for herto be collected.
she was in dancing singing exclaiming spiritsand till she had moved about and talked to herself and laughedand reflected she could be fit for nothing rational.her fathers business was to announce jamess being gone out to putthe horses to preparatory to their now daily drive to randallsand she had therefore an immediate excuse for disappearing.the joy the gratitude the exquisite delight of her sensationsmay be imagined.
the sole grievance and alloy thus removed in theprospect of harriets welfare she was really in danger of becomingtoo happy for security.what had she to wish for  nothing but togrow more worthy of him whose intentions and judgment had beenever so superior to her own.
nothing but that the lessonsof her past folly might teach her humility and circumspection in future.serious she was very serious in her thankfulness and in her resolutionsand yet there was no preventing a laugh sometimes in the very midstof them.
she must laugh at such a close  such an end of the dolefuldisappointment of five weeks back  such a heartsuch a harrietnow there would be pleasure in her returningevery thing wouldbe a pleasure.
it would be a great pleasure to know robert martin.high in the rank of her most serious and heartfelt felicitieswas the reflection that all necessity of concealment frommr.
knightley would soon be over.
the disguise equivocationmystery so hateful to her to practise might soon be over.she could now look forward to giving him that full and perfectconfidence which her disposition was most ready to welcome as a duty.in the gayest and happiest spirits she set forward with her fathernot always listening but always agreeing to what he saidand whether in speech or silence conniving at the comfortablepersuasion of his being obliged to go to randalls every dayor poor mrs. weston would be disappointed.they arrived.mrs.
weston was alone in the drawingroombut hardly had they been told of the baby and mr. woodhousereceived the thanks for coming which he asked for when a glimpsewas caught through the blind of two figures passing near the window.it is frank and miss fairfax said mrs. weston.
i was justgoing to tell you of our agreeable surprize in seeing him arrivethis morning.
he stays till tomorrow and miss fairfax has beenpersuaded to spend the day with us.they are coming in i hope.in half a minute they were in the room.
emma was extremely gladto see himbut there was a degree of confusiona number ofembarrassing recollections on each side.
they met readily and smilingbut with a consciousness which at first allowed little to be saidand having all sat down again there was for some time such a blankin the circle that emma began to doubt whether the wish now indulgedwhich she had long felt of seeing frank churchill once moreand of seeing him with jane would yield its proportion of pleasure.when mr. weston joined the party however and when the babywas fetched there was no longer a want of subject or animationor of courage and opportunity for frank churchill to draw near herand sayi have to thank you miss woodhouse for a very kind forgivingmessage in one of mrs. westons letters.
i hope time has not madeyou less willing to pardon.
i hope you do not retract what youthen said.no indeed cried emma most happy to begin not in the least.i am particularly glad to see and shake hands with youand to giveyou joy in person.he thanked her with all his heart and continued some time to speakwith serious feeling of his gratitude and happiness.is not she looking well said he turning his eyes towards jane.better than she ever used to doyou see how my father andmrs.
weston doat upon her.but his spirits were soon rising again and with laughing eyesafter mentioning the expected return of the campbells he namedthe name of dixon.emma blushed and forbade its being pronouncedin her hearing.i can never think of it she cried without extreme shame.the shame he answered is all mine or ought to be.
but is itpossible that you had no suspicioni mean of late.
early i knowyou had none.i never had the smallest i assure you.that appears quite wonderful.
i was once very nearand i wish i hadit would have been better.
but though i was always doing wrong thingsthey were very bad wrong things and such as did me no service.it would have been a much better transgression had i broken the bondof secrecy and told you every thing.it is not now worth a regret said emma.i have some hope resumed he of my uncles being persuadedto pay a visit at randalls he wants to be introduced to her.when the campbells are returned we shall meet them in londonand continue there i trust till we may carry her northward.but nowi am at such a distance from heris not it hard miss woodhousetill this morning we have not once met since the day of reconciliation.do not you pity meemma spoke her pity so very kindly that with a sudden accessionof gay thought he criedah by the bye then sinking his voice and looking demure forthe momenti hope mr. knightley is well  he paused.she colouredand laughed.i know you saw my letter and think you may remembermy wish in your favour.
let me return your congratulations.i assure you that i have heard the news with the warmest interestand satisfaction.he is a man whom i cannot presume to praise.emma was delighted and only wanted him to go on in the same stylebut his mind was the next moment in his own concerns and with hisown jane and his next words weredid you ever see such a skinsuch smoothness such delicacyand yet without being actually fair.one cannot call her fair.it is a most uncommon complexion with her dark eyelashes and haira most distinguishing complexion  so peculiarly the lady in it.just colour enough for beauty.i have always admired her complexion replied emma archly but do noti remember the time when you found fault with her for being so palewhen we first began to talk of her.have you quite forgottenoh nowhat an impudent dog i washow could i darebut he laughed so heartily at the recollection that emma couldnot help sayingi do suspect that in the midst of your perplexities at that timeyou had very great amusement in tricking us all.i am sure you had.i am sure it was a consolation to you.oh no no nohow can you suspect me of such a thingi was the most miserable wretchnot quite so miserable as to be insensible to mirth.
i am sure itwas a source of high entertainment to you to feel that you were takingus all in.perhaps i am the readier to suspect because to tellyou the truth i think it might have been some amusement to myselfin the same situation.
i think there is a little likeness between us.he bowed.if not in our dispositions she presently added with a look oftrue sensibility there is a likeness in our destiny the destinywhich bids fair to connect us with two characters so much superiorto our own.true true he answered warmly.
no not true on your side.
you canhave no superior but most true on mine.she is a complete angel.look at her.
is not she an angel in every gesture  observe the turnof her throat.
observe her eyes as she is looking up at my father.you will be glad to hear inclining his head and whispering seriouslythat my uncle means to give her all my aunts jewels.
they are to benew set.
i am resolved to have some in an ornament for the head.will not it be beautiful in her dark hairvery beautiful indeed replied emma and she spoke so kindlythat he gratefully burst outhow delighted i am to see you again and to see you in suchexcellent looksi would not have missed this meeting for the world.i should certainly have called at hartfield had you failed to come.the others had been talking of the child mrs. weston giving anaccount of a little alarm she had been under the evening beforefrom the infants appearing not quite well.
she believed she hadbeen foolish but it had alarmed her and she had been within halfa minute of sending for mr. perry.
perhaps she ought to be ashamedbut mr. weston had been almost as uneasy as herself.in ten minuteshowever the child had been perfectly well again.
this washer history and particularly interesting it was to mr. woodhousewho commended her very much for thinking of sending for perryand only regretted that she had not done it.
she should always sendfor perry if the child appeared in the slightest degree disorderedwere it only for a moment.
she could not be too soon alarmednor send for perry too often.
it was a pity perhaps that hehad not come last night for though the child seemed well nowvery well considering it would probably have been better if perryhad seen it.frank churchill caught the name.perry said he to emma and trying as he spoke to catch missfairfaxs eye.
my friend mr. perry  what are they sayingabout mr. perryhas he been here this morningand how doeshe travel nowhas he set up his carriageemma soon recollected and understood him and while she joinedin the laugh it was evident from janes countenance that shetoo was really hearing him though trying to seem deaf.such an extraordinary dream of mine he cried.
i can never thinkof it without laughing.she hears us she hears us miss woodhouse.i see it in her cheek her smile her vain attempt to frown.look at her.
do not you see that at this instant the very passageof her own letter which sent me the report is passing under her eyethat the whole blunder is spread before herthat she can attend tonothing else though pretending to listen to the othersjane was forced to smile completely for a moment and the smilepartly remained as she turned towards him and said in a consciouslow yet steady voicehow you can bear such recollections is astonishing to methey will sometimes obtrudebut how you can court themhe had a great deal to say in return and very entertaininglybut emmas feelings were chiefly with jane in the argument and onleaving randalls and falling naturally into a comparison of the two menshe felt that pleased as she had been to see frank churchilland really regarding him as she did with friendship she had neverbeen more sensible of mr. knightleys high superiority of character.the happiness of this most happy day received its completion in theanimated contemplation of his worth which this comparison produced.chapter xixif emma had still at intervals an anxious feeling for harrieta momentary doubt of its being possible for her to be really curedof her attachment to mr. knightley and really able to acceptanother man from unbiased inclination it was not long that shehad to suffer from the recurrence of any such uncertainty.a very few days brought the party from london and she had nosooner an opportunity of being one hour alone with harrietthan she became perfectly satisfiedunaccountable as it wasthat robert martin had thoroughly supplanted mr. knightleyand was now forming all her views of happiness.harriet was a little distresseddid look a little foolish at firstbut having once owned that she had been presumptuous and sillyand selfdeceived before her pain and confusion seemed to dieaway with the words and leave her without a care for the pastand with the fullest exultation in the present and future for as toher friends approbation emma had instantly removed every fear ofthat nature by meeting her with the most unqualified congratulations.harriet was most happy to give every particular of the evening atastleys and the dinner the next day she could dwell on it allwith the utmost delight.
but what did such particulars explainthe fact was as emma could now acknowledge that harriet hadalways liked robert martin and that his continuing to love her hadbeen irresistible.beyond this it must ever be unintelligibleto emma.the event however was most joyful and every day was giving herfresh reason for thinking so.harriets parentage became known.she proved to be the daughter of a tradesman rich enough to affordher the comfortable maintenance which had ever been hers and decentenough to have always wished for concealment.such was the bloodof gentility which emma had formerly been so ready to vouch forit was likely to be as untainted perhaps as the blood of manya gentleman  but what a connexion had she been preparing formr.
knightleyor for the churchillsor even for mr. eltonthe stain of illegitimacy unbleached by nobility or wealthwould have been a stain indeed.no objection was raised on the fathers side the young man wastreated liberally it was all as it should be  and as emma becameacquainted with robert martin who was now introduced at hartfieldshe fully acknowledged in him all the appearance of sense and worthwhich could bid fairest for her little friend.
she had no doubtof harriets happiness with any goodtempered man but with himand in the home he offered there would be the hope of moreof security stability and improvement.
she would be placed in themidst of those who loved her and who had better sense than herselfretired enough for safety and occupied enough for cheerfulness.she would be never led into temptation nor left for it to find her out.she would be respectable and happy and emma admitted her to bethe luckiest creature in the world to have created so steady andpersevering an affection in such a manor if not quite the luckiestto yield only to herself.harriet necessarily drawn away by her engagements with the martinswas less and less at hartfield which was not to be regretted.the intimacy between her and emma must sink their friendship mustchange into a calmer sort of goodwill and fortunately what oughtto be and must be seemed already beginning and in the most gradualnatural manner.before the end of september emma attended harriet to church and sawher hand bestowed on robert martin with so complete a satisfactionas no remembrances even connected with mr. elton as he stoodbefore them could impair.perhaps indeed at that time shescarcely saw mr. elton but as the clergyman whose blessing at thealtar might next fall on herself.robert martin and harriet smiththe latest couple engaged of the three were the first to be married.jane fairfax had already quitted highbury and was restored to thecomforts of her beloved home with the campbells.the mr. churchillswere also in town and they were only waiting for november.the intermediate month was the one fixed on as far as they daredby emma and mr. knightley.they had determined that their marriageought to be concluded while john and isabella were still at hartfieldto allow them the fortnights absence in a tour to the seasidewhich was the plan.john and isabella and every other friendwere agreed in approving it.
but mr. woodhousehow was mr. woodhouseto be induced to consenthe who had never yet alluded to theirmarriage but as a distant event.when first sounded on the subject he was so miserable that theywere almost hopeless.a second allusion indeed gave less pain.he began to think it was to be and that he could not prevent ita very promising step of the mind on its way to resignation.still however he was not happy.
nay he appeared so much otherwisethat his daughters courage failed.
she could not bear to seehim suffering to know him fancying himself neglected and thoughher understanding almost acquiesced in the assurance of both themr.
knightleys that when once the event were over his distresswould be soon over too she hesitatedshe could not proceed.in this state of suspense they were befriended not by any suddenillumination of mr. woodhouses mind or any wonderful change of hisnervous system but by the operation of the same system in another way.mrs.
westons poultryhouse was robbed one night of all her turkeysevidently by the ingenuity of man.
other poultryyards in theneighbourhood also suffered.pilfering was housebreaking tomr.
woodhouses fears.he was very uneasy and but for the senseof his soninlaws protection would have been under wretched alarmevery night of his life.
the strength resolution and presenceof mind of the mr. knightleys commanded his fullest dependence.while either of them protected him and his hartfield was safe.but mr. john knightley must be in london again by the end of thefirst week in november.the result of this distress was that with a much more voluntarycheerful consent than his daughter had ever presumed to hope for atthe moment she was able to fix her weddingdayand mr. elton wascalled on within a month from the marriage of mr. and mrs. robertmartin to join the hands of mr. knightley and miss woodhouse.the wedding was very much like other weddings where the partieshave no taste for finery or parade and mrs. elton from theparticulars detailed by her husband thought it all extremely shabbyand very inferior to her own.very little white satin very fewlace veils a most pitiful businessselina would stare when sheheard of it.but in spite of these deficiencies the wishesthe hopes the confidence the predictions of the small bandof true friends who witnessed the ceremony were fully answeredin the perfect happiness of the union.finis
